232 CHAPTER 9
Percentage
Year
PARTICIPATION IN PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS, 1824-1860
This chart reveals the remarkable increase in popular participation in presidential elections in the years after 1824. Participation almost doubled between 1824 and 1828, and it increased substantially again beginning in 1840 and continuing through and beyond the Civil War. • What accounts for this dramatic expansion of the electorate? Who remained outside the voting population in these gears?
legitimacy in Rhode Island. The old state government proclaimed that Dorr and his followers were rebels and began to imprison them. Meanwhile, the Dorrites made a brief and ineffectual effort to capture the state arsenal. The Dorr Rebellion, as it was known, quickly failed. Dorr himself surrendered and was briefly imprisoned. But the episode helped pressure the old guard to draft a new constitution, which greatly expanded the suffrage.
The democratization process was far from complete. In much of the South, election laws continued to favor the planters and politicians of the older counties and to limit the influence of newly settled western areas. Slaves, of course, were disenfranchised by definition; they were not considered citizens and were believed to have no legal or political rights. Free blacks could vote nowhere in the South and hardly anywhere in the North. Pennsylvania, in fact, amended its state constitution in 1838 to strip African Americans of the right to vote they had previously enjoyed. In no state could women vote. Nowhere was the ballot secret, and often voters had to cast a spoken vote rather than a written one, which meant that political bosses could, and often did, bribe and intimidate them.
Despite the persisting limitations, however, the number of voters increased far more rapidly than did the population as a whole. Indeed, one of the most striking political trends of the early nineteenth century was the change in the method of
THE DORR REBELLION
The democratic sentiments that swept much of the nation in the 1830s and 1840s led to, among many other events, the Dorr Rebellion (as its opponents termed it) in Rhode Island. Thomas Dorr was one of many Rhode Islanders who denounced the state's constitution, which limited voting rights to a small group of property owners known as "freeholders." (Encyclopaedia Britannica/© UIG/The Bridgeman Art Library) Democratic choosing presidential electors and the dra-Reforms matic increase in popular participation in the process. In 1800, the legislature had chosen the presidential electors in ten of the states, and the people in only six. By 1828, electors were chosen by popular vote in every state but South Carolina. In the presidential election of 1824, less than 27 percent of adult white males had voted. In the election of 1828, the figure rose to 58 percent, and in 1840 to
80 percent.
Tocqueville and Democracy in America
The rapid growth of the electorate-and the emergence of political parties-were among the most striking events of the early nineteenth century. As the right to vote spread widely in these years, it came to be the mark of freedom and democracy. One of the most important commentaries on this extraordinary moment in American life was a book by a French aristocrat, Alexis de Tocqueville. He spent two years in the United States in the 1830s watching the dramatic political changes in the age of Andrew Jackson. The French government had requested him to make a study of American prisons, which were thought to he more humane and effective institutions than prisons in Europe-
JACKSONIAN AMERICA
• 233 Its atPRtStSIAKS REP»!St«I£S
O.U»«abM»	fey.Mwtie«
TOCQUEVILLE.
Rempbcant de Mr Drouyii de Lhuys . __ Puisse le lorgncr qa jl tient loajsars a la win iai fair? voir dair dans les affaires ehanoeres.
ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE
Renowned French printmaker and lithographer Honore Daumier created this caricature of Alexis de Tocqueville in 1849. Tocqueville, also a Frenchman, traveled throughout the United States for two years in the 1830s witnessing the extraordinary growth of the U.S. electorate. In his famous book Democracy in America, he examined and analyzed the political, cultural, and social life of the United States. His work strongly influenced how many in France and the rest of Europe would understand the young country's experience of its emerging democracy. (© Sterling and Francine Clark Art Institute, Williamstown, Massachusetts, USA/The Bridgeman Art Library) But Tocqueville quickly went far beyond the study of prisons and wrote a classic study of American life, titled Democracy in America. Tocqueville examined not just the politics of the United States, but also the daily lives of many groups of Americans and their cultures, their associations, and their visions of democracy. In France in the early decades of the nineteenth century, the fruits of democracy were largely restricted to landowners and aristocrats. But Tocqueville recognized that traditional aristocracies were rapidly fading in America and that new elites could rise and fall no matter what their backgrounds.
Tocqueville also realized that the rising democracy of America had many limits. Democracy was a powerful, visible force in the lives of most white men. Few women could vote, although some shared the democratic ethos through their families. For many other Americans, democracy was a distant hope. Tocqueville wrote of the limits of equality and democracy.
• • • he first who attracts the eye, the first in enlightenment, in power and in happiness, is the white man, the European, man par excellence; below him appear the Negro and the Indian.
These two unfortunate races have neither birth, nor face, nor language, nor mores in common; only their misfortunes look alike. Both occupy an equally inferior position in the country that they inhabit; both experience the effects of tyranny; and if their miseries are different, they can accuse the same author for them.
Tocqueville’s book helped spread the idea of American democracy into France and other European nations. Only later did it become widely read and studied in the United States as a remarkable portrait of the emerging democracy of the United States.
The Legitimization of Party
The high level of voter participation was only partly the result of an expanded electorate. It was also the result of a growing interest in politics and a strengthening of party organization and, perhaps equally important, party loyalty. Although party competition was part of American politics almost from the beginning of the republic, acceptance of the idea of party was not. For more than thirty years, most Americans who had opinions about the nature of government considered parties evils to be avoided and thought the nation should seek a broad consensus in which permanent factional lines would not exist. But in the 1820s and 1830s, those assumptions gave way to a new view: that permanent, institutionalized parties were a desirable part of the political process, that indeed they were essential to democracy.
The elevation of the idea of party occurred first at the state level, most prominently in New York State. There Martin Van Buren led a dissident political faction (known as the "Bucktails” or the "Albany Regency”). In the years after the War of 1812, this group began to challenge the established political leadership-led by the aristocratic governor De Witt Clinton-that had dominated the state for years. Factional rivalries were not new, of course. But the nature of Van Buren’s challenge was. Refuting the traditional view of a political party as undemocratic, they argued that only an institutionalized party, based in the populace at large, could ensure genuine democracy. The alternative was the sort of closed elite that Clinton had created. In the new kind of party the Bucktails proposed, ideological commitments would be less important than loyalty to the party itself. Preservation of the party as an institution-through the use of favors, rewards, and patronage-would be the principal goal of the leadership. Above all, for a party to survive, it must have a permanent opposition. Competing parties would give each political faction a sense of purpose; they would force politicians to remain continually attuned to the will of the people; and they would check and balance each other in much the same way that the different branches of government checked and balanced one another.
By the late 1820s, this new idea of party was spreading beyond New York. The election of Jackson in 1828, the result of a popular movement that seemed to stand apart from the usual political elites, seemed further to legitimize the idea of The Second PartY as a popular, democratic institution. Party System "Parties of some sort must exist,” said a New York newspaper. '"Tis in the nature and genius of our government.” Finally, in the 1830s, a fully
The "Age of Jackson"
fp many Americans in the 1820s and 1830s, Andrew Jackson was a champion of democracy, 1 tj a symbol of a spirit of anti-elitism and egalitarianism that was sweeping American life. In the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, however, historians have disagreed sharply not only in their assessments of Jackson himself, but also in their portrayal of American society in his era.
The "progressive" historians of the early twentieth century tended to see the politics of Jackson and his supporters as a forerunner of their own generation's battles against economic privilege and political corruption. Frederick Jackson Turner encouraged scholars to see Jacksonianism as the product of the democratic West: a protest by the people of the frontier against the conservative aristocracy of the East, which they believed restricted their own freedom and opportunity. Jackson represented those who wanted to make government responsive to the will of the people rather than to the power of special interests. The culmination of this progressive interpretation of Jacksonianism was the publication in 1945 of Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. s The Age of Jackson. Less interested in the regional basis of Jacksonianism than Turner's disciples had been, Schlesinger argued that Jacksonian democracy was an effort "to control the power of the capitalist groups, mainly Eastern, for the benefit of non-capitalist groups, farmers and laboring men, East, West, and South. He portrayed Jacksonianism as an early version of modern reform efforts to "restrain the power of the
(The Library of Congress (3g06446u))
business community."
Richard Hofstadter, in an influential essay in his 1948 book The American Political Tradition, sharply disagreed. Jackson, he argued, was the spokesman of rising entrepreneurs—aspiring businessmen who saw the road to opportunity blocked by the monopolistic power of eastern
formed two-party system began to operate at the national level, with each party committed to its own existence as an institution and willing to accept the legitimacy of its opposition. The anti-Jackson forces began to call themselves Whigs. Jackson’s followers called themselves Democrats (no longer Democratic Republicans), thus giving a permanent name to what is now the nation’s oldest political party.
"President of the Common Man"
Unlike Thomas Jefferson, Jackson was no democratic philosopher. The Democratic Party, much less than Jefferson’s Republicans, embraced no clear or uniform ideological position. But Jackson himself did embrace a distinct, if simple, theory of democracy. It should offer "equal protection and equal benefits” to all its white male citizens and favor no region or class over another. In practice, that meant an assault on what Jackson and his associates considered the citadels of the eastern aristocracy and an effort to extend opportunities to the rising classes of the West and the South. It also meant a firm commitment to the continuing subjugation of African Americans and Indians (and, although for different reasons, women), for the Jacksonians believed that only by keeping these "dangerous” elements from the body politic could the white-male democracy they valued be preserved.
Jackson’s first targets were the entrenched officeholders in the federal government, many of whom had been in place for a generation or more. Official duties, he believed, could be made "so plain and simple that men of intelligence may readily qualify themselves for their performance.” Offices belonged to the people, he argued, not to the entrenched officeholders. Or, as one of his henchmen, William L. Marcy of New York, cynically put it, "To the victors belong the spoils.”
In the end, Jackson removed a total of no more than one-fifth of the federal officeholders during his eight years in office, many
The Spoils	t^lem ^ess h°r partisan reasons than because
System	they had misused government funds or en-
gaged in other corruption. Proportionally,
Jackson dismissed no more jobholders than Jefferson had dismissed during his presidency. But by embracing the philosophy of the "spoils system,” a system already well entrenched in a number of state governments, the Jackson administration helped make the right of elected officials to appoint their own followers to public office an established feature of American politics.
Jackson’s supporters also worked to transform the process by which presidential candidates won their party’s nomination. They had long resented the congressional caucus, a process they believed favored entrenched elites. Jackson himself had avoided the caucus process in 1828. In 1832, the president’s followers staged a national party convention to
aristocrats. The Jacksonian leaders were less sympathetic to the aspirations of those below them than they were to the destruction of obstacles to their own success. Bray Hammond, writing in 1957, argued similarly that the Jacksonian cause was "one of enterpriser against capitalist.” Other historians saw Jacksonianism less as a democratic reform movement than as a nostalgic effort to restore a lost (and largely imagined) past. In The Jacksonian Persuasion (1957), Marvin Meyer argued that Jackson and his followers looked with misgivings on the new industrial society emerging around them and yearned instead for a restoration of the agrarian, republican virtues of an earlier time.
In the 1960s, historians examining the Jacksonian era began looking less at Jackson himself and more at the nature of American society in the early nineteenth century. Lee Benson's The Concept of Jacksonian Democracy (1961) used quantitative methods to demonstrate the role of religion and ethnicity in determining political divisions in the 1830s. Edward Pessen's Jacksonian America (1969) portrayed the Jacksonian era as an increasingly stratified society. This inclination to look more closely at society than at formal "Jacksonianism" continued into the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. Sean Wilentz, in Chants Democratic (1984) and in The Rise of American Democracy (2005), examined the rise in the 1820s of powerful movements among ordinary citizens, who were attracted less to Jackson than to the notion of popular democracy.
Gradually, this attention to Jacksonian-era society has led to reassessments of Jackson himself and the nature of his regime. In Fathers and Children: Andrew Jackson and the Subjugation of the American Indian (1975), Michael Rogin portrays Jackson as a leader of a new American revolution, not against British tyranny but against those who challenged the ability of white men to control the continent. Alexander Saxton, in The Pise and Fall of the White Republic (1990), makes the related point that "Jacksonian democracy" was explicitly a white man's democracy that rested on the subjugation of women, slaves, and Indians. But the portrayal of Jackson as a champion of the common man has not vanished from scholarly life. The leading Jackson biographer of the postwar era, Robert V. Remini, has noted the flaws in Jackson's concept of democracy; but within the context of his time, Remini claims, Jackson was a genuine "man of the people." •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
1.	What was Jacksonian democracy? Was it a reform movement against conservative special interests? Was it a regional movement designed to shift power to the West? Or was it a class-based movement to elevate workers and farmers?
2.	Jackson was known as a "man of the people." Which people were attracted to him?
3.	Can you think of a political movement today that is similar to Jacksonianism (a people's protest against restrictions on their freedom and opportunity, and the desire to make government responsive to the will of the people rather than to the power of special interests)?
enominate him for the presidency-one year after the Anti-masons (see p. 245) became the first party to hold such a neeting. In later generations, some Americans would see the )arty convention as a source of corruption and political exclusivity. But those who created it in the 1830s considered t a great triumph for democracy. Through the convention, hey believed, power would arise directly from the people, lot from aristocratic political institutions such as the caucus.
The ’’spoils” system and the political convention did serve to imit the power of two entrenched elites—permanent officeholders and the exclusive party caucus. Yet neither really transferred power to the people. Appointments to office almost always went to prominent political allies of the president and his associates. Delegates to national conventions were less often common men than members of local
arty organizations. Political opportunity within the party was landing, but much less so than Jacksonian rhetoric suggested.
Limited Nature of Democratic Reform
FEDERAL UNION”
(ackson’s commitment to extending power beyond entrenched elites led him to want to reduce the functions of the federal government. The concentration of power in Washington, he
believed, restricted opportunity to people with political connections. But Jackson also believed in forceful presidential leadership and was strongly committed to the preservation of the Union. Thus, at the same time that Jackson was promoting an economic program to reduce the power of the national government, he was asserting the supremacy of the Union in the face of a potent challenge. For no sooner had he entered office than his own vice president-John C. Calhoun-began to champion a controversial (and, in Jackson’s view, dangerous) constitutional theory: nullification.
Calhoun and Nullification
Calhoun was forty-six years old in 1828, with a distinguished past and an apparently promising future. But the smoldering issue of the tariff created a dilemma for him. Once he had been an outspoken protectionist and had strongly supported the tariff of 1816. But by the late 1820s, many South Carolinians had come to believe that the ’’tariff of abominations” was responsible for the stagnation of the state’s economy-even though the stagnation was largely a result of the exhaustion of South Carolina’s farmland, which could no longer compete effectively with the newly opened fertile lands of the Southwest. Some exasperated Carolinians were ready to consider a drastic remedy-secession.
235
236 • CHAPTER 9
JOHN C. CALHOUN
This photograph, by Mathew Brady, captured Calhoun toward the end of his life, when he was torn between his real commitment to the ideals of the Union and his equally fervent commitment to the interests of the South. The younger generation of southern leaders, who would dominate the politics of the region in the 1850s, were less idealistic and more purely sectional in their views. (The Library of Congress) Calhoun’s Theory of Nullification
Calhoun’s future political hopes rested on how he met this challenge in his home state. He did so by developing a theory that he believed offered a moderate alternative to secession: the theory of nullification. Drawing from the ideas of Madison and Jefferson and their Virginia
and Kentucky Resolutions of 1798-1799 and citing the Tenth Amendment to the Constitution, Calhoun argued that since the federal government was a creation of the states, the states-not the courts or Congress-were the final arbiters of the constitutionality of federal laws. If a state concluded that Congress had passed an unconstitutional law, then it could hold a special convention and declare the federal law null and void within the state. The nullification doctrine-and the idea of using it to nullify the 1828 tariff-quickly attracted broad support in South Carolina. But it did nothing to help Calhoun’s standing within the new administration, in part because he had a powerful rival in Martin Van Buren.
The Rise of Van Buren
Van Buren was about the same age as Calhoun and equally ambitious. He had won election to the governorship of New York
Martin Van Buren’s Growing Influence
in 1828 and then resigned in 1829 when Jackson appointed him secretary of state. Alone among the figures in the Jackson administration, Van Buren soon established himself as a member both of the official cabinet and of the president’s unofficial circle of political allies, known as the "Kitchen Cabinet” (which included such Democratic
newspaper editors as Isaac Hill of New Hampshire and Amos Kendall and Francis P. Blair of Kentucky). Van Buren’s influence with the president was unmatched and grew stronger still as a result of a quarrel over etiquette that drove a wedge between the president and Calhoun.
Peggy O’Neale was the attractive daughter of a Washington tavernkeeper with whom both Andrew Jackson and his friend John H. Eaton had taken lodgings while serving as senators from Tennessee. O’Neale was married, but rumors circulated in Washington in the mid-1820s that she and the unmarried Senator Eaton were having an affair. O Neales husband died in 1828, and she and Eaton were soon married. A few weeks later, Jackson named Eaton secretary of war and thus made the new Mrs. Eaton a cabinet wife. The rest of the administration wives, led by Mrs. Calhoun, refused to receive her socially. Jackson (remembering the effects of public slander directed against his own late wife) was furious and demanded that the members of the cabinet accept her into their social world. Calhoun, under pressure from his wife, refused. Van Buren, a widower, befriended the Eatons and thus ingratiated himself with Jackson. By 1831, partly as a result of the Peggy Eaton affair, Jackson had chosen Van Buren to succeed him in the White House, apparently ending Calhoun’s dreams of the presidency.
The Webster-Hayne Debate
In January 1830, as the controversy over nullification grew more intense, a great debate occurred in the U.S. Senate over another sectional controversy. In the midst of a routine debate over federal policy toward western lands, a senator from Connecticut suggested that all land sales and surveys in the west be temporarily discontinued so as to slow the growth of slavery. Robert Y. Hayne, a young senator from South Carolina, responded, charging that slowing down the growth of the West was a way for the East to retain its political and economic power. Although he had no real interest in western lands, he hoped his stance would attract support from westerners in Congress for South Carolina’s drive to lower the tariff. Both the South and the West, he argued, were victims of the tyranny of the Northeast. He hinted that the two regions might combine to defend themselves against that tyranny.
Daniel Webster, now a senator from Massachusetts and a nationalistic Whig, attacked Hayne the next day, and through him Calhoun, for what he considered their challenge to the integrity of the Union. He was, in fact, challenging Hayne to a debate not on public lands and the tariff but on the issue of states rights versus national power. Hayne, coached by Calhoun,
JACKSONIAN AMERICA
• 237 MARTIN VAN BUREN
As leader of the so-called Albany Regency in New York in the 1820s, Van Buren helped create one of the first modern party organizations in the United States. Later, as Andrew Jackson’s secretary of state and (after 1832) vice president, he helped bring party politics to the national level. In 1840, when he ran for reelection to the presidency, he lost to William Henry Harrison, whose Whig Party made effective use of many of the techniques of mass politics that Van Buren himself had pioneered. (The Library of Congress) DANIEL WEBSTER
The great Civil War photographer Mathew Brady took this portrait of Daniel Webster shortly before Webster's death in 1852. It conveys something of Webster's intensity of purpose—an intensity that was perhaps most famously visible in his dramatic 1830 debate with South Carolina senator Robert Y. Hayne. In his response to Hayne, he spoke words that became a rallying cry in the North: "Liberty and Union, now and forever, one and inseparable." During his long political career, Webster was one of the giants of American politics, a man of much greater stature than many of the presidents who were his contemporaries. (The Library of Congress) with his own: "The Union, next to our liberty most dear.” The two most important figures in government had drawn sharp lines between themselves.
responded with a defense of the theory of nullification. Webster then spent two full afternoons delivering what became known States’ Rights as h*s "Second Reply to Hayne,” a speech versus National t^lat northerners quoted and revered for
Power	years to come. He concluded with the
ringing appeal '’Liberty and Union, now
and forever, one and inseparable!”
Both sides now waited to hear what President Jackson
thought of the argument. The answer became clear at the annual Democratic Party banquet in honor of Thomas Jefferson. After dinner, guests delivered a series of toasts. The president arrived with a written text in which he had underscored certain words: "Our Federal Union—It must be preserved.” While he spoke, he looked directly at Calhoun. The diminutive Van Buren, who stood on his chair to see better, thought he saw Calhoun’s hand shake and a trickle of wine run down his glass as he responded to the president s toast
The Nullification Crisis
In 1832, finally, the controversy over nullification produced a crisis. A congressional tariff bill was passed that offered South Carolinians no relief from the 1828 "tariff of abominations.” Almost immediately, the legislature summoned a state convention, which voted to nullify the tariffs of 1828 and 1832 and to forbid the collection of duties within the state. At the same time, South Carolina elected Hayne to serve as governor and Calhoun (who resigned as vice president) to replace Hayne as senator.
Jackson insisted that nullification was treason and that those implementing it were traitors. He strengthened the federal forts in South Carolina and ordered a warship and several revenue ships to Charleston. When Congress convened early in 1833, Jackson proposed a force bill authorizing the president to use the military to see that acts of Congress were obeyed. Violence seemed a real possibility.
238 CHAPTER 9
NEW YORK HARBOR
This aquatint, by W. J. Bennett (after the painting by John William Hill) shows Manhattan viewed from Brooklyn Heights around 1836. By this time, overseas traders had increasingly directed their business to New York, leaving much less opportunity for other cities, especially those in the South. (© The Granger Collection, New York) Compromise
Calhoun faced a predicament as he took his place in the Senate. Not a single state had come to South Carolina’s support. Even South Carolina itself was divided and could not hope to prevail in a showdown with the federal government. But the timely intervention of Henry Clay, newly elected to the Senate, averted a crisis. Clay devised a compromise by which the tariff would be lowered grad-
ually so that, by 1842, it would reach approximately the same level as in 1816. The compromise and the force bill were passed on the same day, March 1, 1833. Jackson signed them both. In South Carolina, the convention reassembled and repealed its nullification of the tariffs. Calhoun and his followers claimed a victory for nullification, which had, they insisted, forced the revision of the tariff. But the episode made clear that no state could defy the federal government alone.
THE REMOVAL OF THE INDIANS
There had never been any doubt about Andrew Jackson’s attitude toward the Indian tribes that continued to live in the eastern states and territories of the United States. He
wanted them to move west, beyond the Mississippi, out of the way of expanding white settlement. Jackson’s antipathy toward the Native Americans had a special intensity because of his own earlier experiences leading military campaigns against tribes along the southern border. But in most respects, his views were little different from those of most other white Americans.
White Attitudes toward the Tribes
Changing Attitudes TOWARD THE Indians
In the eighteenth century, many white Americans had consid ered the Indians "noble savages,” peoples without real civilization. but with an inherent dignity that made civilization possible among them By the first decades of the nineteenth cen tury, this vaguely paternalistic attitude (the attitude of Thomas Jefferson, amoty
others) was giving way to a more hostile one, particular!)
among the whites in the western states and territories whom Jackson came to represent. Such whites were coming to view Native Americans simply as "savages,” not only uncivilized but uncivilizable. Whites, they believed, should not be expect to live in close proximity to the tribes.
JACKSONIAN AMERICA * 239
White westerners favored removal as well because they feared that continued contact between the expanding white settlements and the Indians would produce endless conflict and violence. Most of all, however, they favored Indian removal because of their own insatiable desire for territory. The tribes possessed valuable land in the path of expanding white settlement. White Americans wanted it.
The Black Hawk War
Sauk and Fox Indians Defeated
In the Old Northwest, the long process of expelling the woodland Indians culminated in a last battle in 1831-1832, between white settlers in Illinois and an alliance of Sauk (or Sac) and Fox Indians under the fabled and now aged warrior Black Hawk. An earlier treaty had ceded tribal lands in Illinois to the United States; but Black Hawk and his followers refused to recognize the legality of the agreement, which a rival tribal faction had signed. Hungry and resentful, a thousand of them crossed the river and reoccupied vacant lands in Illinois. White settlers in the region feared that the resettlement was the beginning of a substantial invasion, and they assembled the Illinois state militia and federal troops to repel the "invaders.”
The Black Hawk War, as it became known, was notable chiefly for the viciousness of the white military efforts. White leaders in western Illinois vowed to exterminate the "bandit collection of Indians” and attacked them even when Black Hawk attempted to surrender. The Sauks and
Foxes, defeated and starving, retreated across the Mississippi into Iowa. White troops (and some bands of Sioux whom they encouraged to join the chase) pursued them as they fled and
black HAWK AND WHIRLING THUNDER After his defeat by white settlers in Illinois in 1832, the famed Sauk warrior Black Hawk and his son Whirling Thunder were capture sent on a tour of the East by Andrew Jackson, displayed to the public as trophies of w y showed such dignity through the ordeal that much of the white public quickly began to symPa* IZ® with them. This portrait, by John Wesley Jarvis, was painted on the tour's final stop, in ew or City. Black Hawk wears the European-style suit, while Whirling Thunder wears native emphasize his commitment to his tribal roots. Soon thereafter, Black Hawk returned wrote a celebrated autobiography, and died in 1838. (© The Granger Collection, Ne
slaughtered most of them. United States troops captured Black Hawk himself and sent him on a tour of the East, where Andrew Jackson was one of many curious whites who arranged to meet him. (Abraham Lincoln served as a captain of the militia, but saw no action, in the Black Hawk War; Jefferson Davis was a lieutenant in the regular army.)
The "Five Civilized Tribes”
Agrarian Tribes of the South
Removal Act
More troubling to the government in the 1830s were the tribes remaining in the South. In western Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, and Florida lived what were known as the "Five Civilized Tribes”-the Cherokee, Creek, Seminole, Chickasaw, and Choctaw-most of whom had established
settled agricultural societies with successful economies. The Cherokees in Georgia had formed a particularly stable and sophisticated culture, with their own written language and a formal constitution (adopted in 1827) that created an independent Cherokee Nation. They were more closely tied to their lands than many of the nomadic tribes to the north.
Even some whites argued that the Cherokees, unlike other tribes, should be allowed to retain their eastern lands, since they had become such a "civilized” society and had, under pressure from missionaries and government agents, given up many of their traditional ways. Cherokee men had once been chiefly hunters and had left farming mainly to women. By now the men had given up most of their hunting and (like most white men) took over the farming themselves; Cherokee women, also like their white counterparts, restricted themselves largely to domestic tasks.
The federal government worked steadily to negotiate treaties with the southern Indians that would remove them to the West and open their lands for white settlement. But the negotiating process did not proceed
fast enough to satisfy the region’s whites. The state of Georgia’s independent effort to dislodge the Creeks, over the objection of President Adams, was one example of this impatience. That same impatience became evident early in Jackson’s administration, when the legislatures in Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi began passing laws to regulate the tribes remaining in their states. They received assistance in these efforts from Congress, which in 1830 passed the Removal Act (with Jackson’s approval) to appropriate money to finance federal negotiations with the southern tribes aimed at relocating them to the West. The president quickly dispatched federal officials to negotiate nearly a hundred new treaties with the remaining tribes. Thus the southern tribes faced a combination of pressures from both the state and federal governments. Most tribes were too weak to resist, and they ceded their lands in return for token payments. Some, however, balked.
In Georgia, the Cherokees tried to stop the white encroachments (which were actively encouraged by Jackson) by appealing to the Supreme Court. The Court’s decisions in Cherokee Nation v. Georgia and Worcester v. Georgia in 1831 and 1832 (see p. 224) seemed at least partially to vindicate the tribe. But Jackson’s longtime hostility toward Native Americans left him
240 CHAPTER 9
with little sympathy for the Cherokees and little patience with the Court. He was eager to retain the support of white southerners and westerners in the increasingly bitter partisan battles in which his administration was becoming engaged. When the chief justice announced the decision in Worcester v. Georgia, Jackson reportedly responded with contempt. "John Marshall has made his decision,” he was reported to have said. "Now let him enforce it.” The decision was not enforced.
In 1835, the federal government extracted a treaty from a minority faction of the Cherokees, none of them a chosen rep-
Cherokee resentative of the Cherokee Nation. The
Resistance treaty ceded the tribe’s land to Georgia in return for $5 million and a reservation west of the Mississippi. The great majority of the 17,000 Cherokees did not recognize the treaty as legitimate and refused to leave their homes. But Jackson would not be thwarted. He sent an army of 7,000 under General Winfield Scott to
round them up and drive them westward at bayonet point.
Trails of Tears
About 1,000 Cherokees fled across the state line to North Carolina, where the federal government eventually provided a
Cherokee small reservation for them in the Smoky
Removal Mountains, which survives today. But most of the rest made the long, forced trek to
"Indian Territory” (which later became Oklahoma) beginning in the winter of 1838. Along the way, a Kentuckian observed: "Even aged females, apparently nearly ready to drop in the grave, were travelling with heavy burdens attached to their backs, sometimes on frozen ground and sometimes on muddy streets, with no covering for their feet.”
Thousands, perhaps an eighth or more of the emigres, perished before or soon after reaching their unwanted destination. Indian	In harsh new reservations in which they
Removal were now forced to live, the survivors never forgot the hard journey. They called their route "The Trail Where They Cried,” the Trail of Tears. Jackson claimed that the "remnant of that ill-fated race” was now "beyond the reach of injury or oppression,” apparently trying to convince himself or others that he had supported removal as a
way to protect the tribes.
The Cherokees were not alone in experiencing the hardships of the Trail of Tears. Between 1830 and 1838, virtually all the "Five Civilized Tribes” were expelled from the southern states and forced to relocate in the new Indian Territory, which
the White House, he ensured the, few Indians wouid remain^oft ,	h h*™eXP'°itS	tribeS' °"Ce "
dramatic "removals" of Indian tribes ou, of their traditiona a dTi 7m W'’"e Se“le"»"‘sing there. The result was a series of tribes had to travel.	ln'°	West °f the M,ss,ss,ppi-mostly in Oklahoma. Note the very long distance many of these
• Why .os the route of the Cherokees, sho.n in the upper portion of the map, kno.n os the Trai, of Tears'?
JACKSONIAN AMERICA * 241
Congress had officially created by the Indian Intercourse Act of 1834. The Choctaws of Mississippi and western Alabama were the first to make the trek, beginning in 1830. The army moved out the Creeks of eastern Alabama and western Georgia in 1836. The Chickasaws in northern Mississippi began the long march westward a year later, and the Cherokees, finally, a year after that. The government thought the Indian Territory was safely distant from existing white settlements and consisted of land that most whites considered undesirable. It had the additional advantage, the government believed, of being on the eastern edge of what earlier white explorers had christened the "Great American Desert,” land unfit for habitation. It seemed unlikely that whites would ever seek to settle along the western borders of the Indian Territory; and thus the prospect of whites surrounding the reservation and producing further conflict seemed remote.
Only the Seminoles in Florida managed to resist the pressures to relocate, and even their success was limited. Like other tribes, the Seminoles had agreed under pressure to a settlement (the 1832-1833 treaties of Payne’s Landing), by which they ceded their lands to the government and agreed to move to Indian Territory within three years. Most did move west, but a substantial minority, under the leadership of the chieftain Osceola, refused to leave and staged an uprising beginning in 1835 to defend their lands. (Joining the Seminoles in their struggle was a group of runaway black slaves who had been living with the tribe.) The Seminole War dragged on for years. Jackson sent troops to Florida, but the Seminoles with their African American associates were masters of guerrilla warfare in
The Seminole the jungly Ever§lades- Even after Osceola WAR	had been treacherously captured by white
troops while under a flag of truce and had died in prison; even after white troops had engaged in a systematic campaign of extermination against the resisting Indians and their black allies; even after 1,500 white soldiers had died and the federal government had spent $20 million on the struggle-even then, followers of Osceola remained in Florida.
Finally, in 1842, the government abandoned the war. By then, many of the Seminoles had been either killed or forced westward. But the relocation of the Seminoles, unlike the relocation of most of the other tribes, was never complete.
The Meaning of Removal
By the end of the 1830s, almost all the important Indian societies east of the Mississippi had been removed to the West. The tribes had ceded over 100 million acres of eastern land to the federal government; they had received in return about $68 million and 32 million acres in the far less hospitable lands west of the Mississippi between the Missouri and Red Rivers. There they lived, divided by tribe into a series of carefully de^ fined reservations, in a territory surrounded by a string o United States forts to keep them in (and to keep most w ites out), in a region whose climate and topography bore little re a don to anything they had known before. Eventually, even t is forlorn enclave would face incursions from white civilization.
What were the alternatives to the removal of the eastern Indians? There was probably never any realistic possibility that the government could stop white expansion westward. White people had already been penetrating the West for nearly two centuries, and such penetrations were certain to continue. But did that expansion really require removal?
There were, in theory at least, several alternatives to the brutal removal policy. There were many examples in the West of white settlers and native tribes living side by
Alternatives side anj creating a shared (if not necessarily to Removal eqUai) world. In the pueblos of New Mexico,
ACTS
OF » « t
STATE of GEORGIA
■©•©•••©•©•O'
AN ACT
ratify and confirm certain articles of agreement and cef*
Jion entered into ontbei+tb day of April 1802, between fbe Commiffwners oftbe State of Georgia on tbe one part* and tbe Commijfioners of tbe United States on tbe other
part,
WHEREAS the Commiffiooers of the State of Georgia, to wit: James Jackfon, Abraham Baldwin, and John Milledge, duly authorized and appointed by, and on the part and behalf of the faid State of Georgia j and the Commiffioncrs of the United States, James Madifon, Albert Gallatin, and Levi Lincoln, duly authorized and appointed by, and on the part and behalf of the faid United States, to make an amicable Settlement of limits, between the two Sovereignties, af. ter a due examination of their refpefhve powers, did, on the 24th day of April laft, enter into a jleed of articles, and mutual ceffion, in the words following, to wit:
ARTICLES of agreement and ceffion, entered into on the twenty-fourth day of April, one thoufand eight hundred and two, between the Commiffioncrs appointed on the part of the United States, by virtue of an a& en-wded, “ An a& for an amicable fctdemtnt of limt»
THE REMOVAL OF INDIANS FROM GEORGIA
On April 24,1831, Georgia issued an agreement to document the forced removal of Native Americans from the state. This policy forced thousands of Native Americans from their traditional tribal lands to new "reservations" west of the Mississippi River. The Cherokees were among the first tribes forced to move. The conditions of this forced displacement were harsh and many people died, prompting survivors to call the route they had traveled the "Trail of Tears." (Private Collection/© Peter Newark American Pictures/The Bridgeman Art Library) 242 CHAPTER 9
in the fur trading posts of the Pacific Northwest, in parts of Texas and California, settlers from Mexico, Canada, and the United States had created societies in which Indians and whites were in intimate contact with each other. Even during the famous Lewis and Clark expedition, white explorers had lived with western Indians on terms of such intimacy that many of them contracted venereal disease from Indian sexual partners. Sometimes these close contacts between whites and Indians were beneficial to both sides, even reasonably equal. Sometimes they were cruel and exploitive. But the early multiracial societies of the West did not separate whites and Indians. They demonstrated ways in which the two cultures could interact, each shaping the other.
By the mid-nineteenth century, however, white Americans had adopted a different model as they contemplated westward expansion. Much as the early British settlers along the Atlantic coast had established "plantations,” from which natives were, in theory, to be excluded, so the westward-moving whites of later years came to imagine the territories they were entering as virgin land, with no preexisting civilization. Native Americans, they believed, could not be partners either equal or subordinate-in the creation of new societies in the West. They were obstacles, to be removed and, as far as possible, isolated. Indians, Andrew Jackson once said, had "neither the intelligence, the industry, the moral habits, nor the desire of improvement” to be fit partners in the project of extending white civilization westward. By dismissing Native American cultures in that way, white Americans justified to themselves a series of harsh policies that they believed (incorrectly) would make the West theirs alone.
JACKSON AND THE BANK WAR
Jackson’s Opposition to Concentrated Power
Jackson was quite willing to use federal power against rebellious states and Indian tribes. On economic issues, however, he was consistently opposed to concentrating power either in the federal government or in powerful and, in his view, aristocratic institutions associated with it. An early example of his skeptical view of federal power was his 1830 veto of a congressional measure providing a subsidy to the proposed Maysville Road in Kentucky. The bill was unconstitutional, Jackson argued, because the road in question lay entirely
within Kentucky and was not, therefore, a part of "interstate commerce.” But the bill was also unwise, he believed, because it committed the government to what Jackson considered extravagant expenditures.
Jackson s opposition to federal power and aristocratic privilege lay behind the most celebrated episode of his presidency: the war against the Bank of the United States.
Biddle's Institution
The Bank of the United States in the 1830s was a mighty institution, and it is not surprising that it would attract Jackson’s wrath. Its stately headquarters in Philadelphia seemed to
Hard and Soft Money
Nicholas symbolize its haughty image of itself, it
Biddle	had branches in twenty-nine other cities,
making it the most powerful and far-flung financial institution in the nation. By law, the Bank was the only place that the federal government could deposit its own funds; the government, in turn, owned one-fifth of the Bank’s stock. The Bank did a tremendous business in general banking. It provided credit to growing enterprises; it issued bank notes, which served as a dependable medium of exchange throughout the country; and it exercised a restraining effect on the less well-managed state banks. Nicholas Biddle, who served as president of the Bank from 1823 on, had done much to put the institution on a sound and prosperous basis. Nevertheless, Andrew Jackson was determined to destroy it.
Opposition to the Bank came from two very different groups: the "soft-money” faction and the "hard-money” faction. Advocates of soft money-people who wanted more currency in circulation and believed that issuing bank notes unsupported by gold and silver was the best way to circulate more currency-consisted largely of state bankers and their allies.
They objected to the Bank of the United States because it restrained the state banks from issuing notes freely. The hard-money
people believed that gold and silver were the only basis for money. They condemned all banks that issued bank notes, including the Bank of the United States. The soft-money advocates were believers in rapid economic growth and speculation; the hard-money forces embraced older ideas of "public virtue” and looked with suspicion on expansion and speculation.
Jackson supported the hard-money position. Many years before, he had been involved in some grandiose land and commercial speculations based on paper credit. His business had failed in the Panic of 1797, and he had fallen deeply into debt. After that, he was suspicious of all banks and all paper currency. But as president he was also sensitive to the complaints of his many soft-money supporters in the West and the South. He made it clear that he would not favor renewing the charter of the Bank of the United States, which was due to expire in 1836.
A
Philadelphia aristocrat unaccustomed to politics, Biddle nevertheless began granting financial favors to influential men who he thought might help him preserve the Bank. In particular, he turned to Daniel Webster and cultivated a close personal friendship with him. He named Webster the Banks legal counsel and director of its Boston branch; Webster was also a frequent, heavy borrower from the Bank. He helped Biddle win the support of other important figures, among them Henry Clay. Clay, Webster, and other advisers persuaded Biddle to apply to Congress in 1832 for a bill to renew the Bank’s charter. That was four years ahead of the date the original charter was scheduled to expire. But forcing a vote now would allow the Bank to become a major issue in the 1832 national elections. Congress Jackson’s Veto passed the recharter bill; Jackson, prediet' ably, vetoed it; and the Bank’s supporters in
JACKSONIAN AMERICA - 243
Candidate (Party)
Electoral Vote Popular Vote (%)
Andrew Jackson (Democrat)
219	687,502
(55)
a Henry Clay	49
(National Republican)
530,189
(42)
William Wirt (Anti-Mason)
7	33,108
(3)
John Floyd
(Independent Democrat)
Not voted
11
2
THE ELECTION OF 1832
Jackson’s reelection victory in 1832 was almost as decisive as his earlier victory in 1828. What changes are visible in party loyalties since the previous election?
Congress failed to override the veto. Just as Clay had hoped, the 1832 campaign now centered on the future of the Bank.
Clay ran for president that year as the unanimous choice of the National Republicans, who held a nominating convention in Baltimore late in 1831. But the Bank War failed to provide him with the winning issue for which he had hoped. Jackson, with Van Buren as his running mate, overwhelmingly defeated Clay (and several minor party candidates) with 55 percent of the popular vote and 219 electoral votes (more than four times as many as Clay received). These results were a defeat not only for Clay, but also for Biddle.
appointed a new one. When the new secretary similarly balked, Jackson fired him too and named a third, more compliant secretary: Attorney General Roger B. Taney, his close friend and loyal ally. Taney began placing the government’s deposits not in the Bank of the United States, as it had in the past, but in a number of state banks (which Jackson’s enemies called "pet banks”).
Nicholas Biddle, whom Jacksonians derisively called "Czar Nicholas,” did not give in without a fight. "This worthy President,” he wrote sarcastically, "thinks that because he has scalped Indians and imprisoned Judges, he is to have his way with the Bank. He is mistaken.” When the administration began to transfer funds directly from the Bank of the United States to the pet banks (as opposed to the initial practice of simply depositing new funds in those banks), Biddle called in loans and raised interest rates, explaining that without the government deposits the Bank’s resources were stretched too thin. He realized his actions were likely to cause financial distress. He hoped a short recession would persuade Congress to recharter the Bank. "Nothing but the evidence of suffering,” he told a colleague, would "produce any effect in Congress.” By now, the struggle had become not just a conflict over policy and principle, but also a bitter personal battle between two proud men-both of them acting recklessly in an effort to humiliate and defeat the other.
As financial conditions worsened in the winter of 1833-1834, supporters of the Bank blamed Jackson’s policies for the recession. They organized meetings around the country and sent petitions to Washington urging a rechartering of the Bank. But the Jacksonians blamed the recession on Biddle and refused to budge. When distressed citizens appealed to the president for help, he dismissively answered, "Go to Biddle.”
Finally, Biddle contracted credit too far even for his own allies in the business community, who began to fear that in his effort to save his own bank he was threatening their interests. Some of them did "go to Biddle.” A group of New York and Boston merchants protested. To appease the business community, Biddle at last reversed himself and began to grant credit in abundance and on reasonable terms. His vacillating and unpopular tactics ended his chances of winning a recharter of the Bank.
Jackson had won a considerable political victory. But when the Bank of the United States died in 1836, the country lost a Jackson valuable, albeit flawed, financial institution
Victorious and was left with a fragmented and chronically unstable banking system that would
plague the economy for more than a century.
The "Monster” Destroyed
[ackson was now more determined than ever to destroy the ’monster’ Bank as quickly as possible. He could not legally abolish the institution before the expiration of its charter. Instead, he tried to weaken it. He decided to remove the government s deposits from the Bank. His secretary of the trea-
sury believed that such an action would destabilize the financial system and refused to give the order. Jackson fired him an
Removal of Government Deposits
The Taney Court
In the aftermath of the Bank War, Jackson moved against the most powerful institution of economic nationalism of all: the Supreme Court. In 1835, when John Marshall died, the president appointed as the new chief justice his trusted ally Roger B. Taney. Taney did not bring a sharp break in constitutional interpretation, but he gradually helped modify Marshall’s vigorous nationalism.
Perhaps the clearest indication of the new judicial mood was the celebrated case of Charles River Bridge v. Warren Bridge
244 • CHAPTER 9

..«««»....
TOT?
OTW^FALl, OF SSOTHBR BASTW. DOWNFALL OF MOTHER BANK”
This 1832 cartoon celebrates Andrew Jackson’s destruction of the Bank of the United States. The president is shown here driving away the Banks corrupt supporters by ordering the withdrawal of government deposits. (The Library of Congress (LC-USZ62-809)) Charles River Bridge v. Warren Bridge
of 1837. The case involved a dispute between two Massachusetts companies over the right to build a bridge across the Charles River between Boston and Cambridge. One company had a long-standing charter from the state to operate a toll bridge and claimed that this charter guaranteed it a monopoly of the bridge traffic. Another company had applied to the legislature for authorization to construct a second, competing bridge that would-since it would be toll free-greatly reduce the value of the first company's charter.
The first company contended that in granting the second charter the legislature was engaging in a breach of contract
and noted that the Marshall Court, in the Dartmouth College case and other decisions, had ruled that states had no right to abrogate contracts. But now Taney, speaking for the Democratic majority on the Court, supported the right of Massachusetts to award the second charter. The object of government, Taney maintained, was to promote the general happiness, an object that took precedence over the rights of contract and property. A state, therefore, had the right to amend or abrogate a contract if such action was necessary to advance the well-being of the community. Such an abrogation was clearly necessary in the
case of the Charles River Bridge, he argued, because the original bridge company, by exercising a monopoly, was benefiting from unjustifiable privilege. (It did not help the first company that its members were largely Boston aristocrats closely associated with Harvard College; the challenging company, by contrast, consisted largely of newer, aspiring entrepreneurs-the sort of people with whom Jackson and his allies instinctively identified.) The decision reflected one of the cornerstones of the Jacksonian ideal: that the key to democracy was an expansion of economic opportunity, which would not occur if older corporations could maintain monopolies and choke off competition from newer companies.
THE CHANGING FACE OF AMERICAN POLITICS
jacks on's lorcelul-some people claimed tyrannical- -crushing first the nullification movement and then the Bank o the United States helped galvanize a growing
Birto of the opposition coalition that by the mid-1830:
was ready to assert itself in national poimu
JACKSONIAN AMERICA
• 245 Denouncing the president as "King Andrew I,” they began to refer to themselves as Whigs, after the party in England that had traditionally worked to limit the power of the king. With the emergence of the Whigs, the nation once again had two competing political parties. What scholars now call the "Second Party System’ began what turned out to be its relatively brief life.
Democrats and Whigs
The two parties were different from one another in their philosophies, in their constituencies, and in the character of their
Democrats’ Emphasis on Opportunity
leaders. But they became increasingly alike in the way they approached the process of electing their followers to office.
Democrats in the 1830s envisioned a future of steadily expanding economic and political opportunities for white males.
The role of government should be limited, they believed, but it should include efforts to remove obstacles to opportunity and to avoid creating new ones. That meant defend-
ing the Union, which Jacksonians believed was essential to the dynamic economic growth they favored. It also meant attacking centers of corrupt privilege. As Jackson himself said in his farewell address, the society of America should be one in which "the planter, the farmer, the mechanic, and the laborer, all know that their success depends on their own industry and economy/’ in which artificial privilege would stifle no one’s opportunity. Among the most radical members of the party-the so-called Locofocos, mainly workingmen and small businessmen and professionals in the Northeast-sentiment was strong for a vigorous, perhaps even violent assault on monopoly and privilege far in advance of anything Jackson himself ever contemplated.
The political philosophy that became known as Whiggery was very different. It favored expanding the power of the fed-
Whigs’ Call eral 8overnment’ encouraging industrial for Economic an<^ commercial development, and knitting
Union	the country together into a consolidated
economic system. Whigs embraced material progress enthusiastically; but unlike the Democrats, they were cautious about westward expansion, fearful that rapid territorial growth would produce instability. Their vision of America was of a nation embracing the industrial future and
rising to world greatness as a commercial and manufacturing power. Thus, while Democrats were inclined to oppose legislation establishing banks, corporations, and other modernizing institutions, Whigs generally favored such measures.
The Whigs were strongest among the more substantial merchants and manufacturers of the Northeast; the wealthier planters of the South (those who favored commercial development and the strengthening of ties with the North); and the ambitious farmers and rising commercial class of the West usually migrants from the Northeast-who advocated internal improvements, expanding trade, and rapid economic progress. The Democrats drew more support from smaller merchants and the workingmen of the Northeast; from southern planters suspicious of industrial growth; and from westerners usually with southern roots-who favored a predominantly agrarian
Anti-Masons
economy and opposed the development of powerful economic institutions in their region. Whigs tended to be wealthier than Democrats, to have more aristocratic backgrounds, and to be more commercially ambitious.
But Whig and Democratic politicians alike were more interested in winning elections than in maintaining philosophical purity. And both parties made frequent adjustments in their public postures to attract the largest possible number of voters. In New York, for example, the Whigs worked to develop a popular following by making a connection to a movement known as Anti-Masonry.
The Anti-Mason movement had emerged in the 1820s in response to widespread resentment against the secret, exclusive, and hence supposedly undemocratic, Society of Freemasons. Such resentments greatly increased in 1826 when a former Mason, William Morgan, mysteriously disappeared (and was assumed to have been murdered) from his home in Batavia, New York, shortly before he was scheduled to publish a book exposing the supposed secrets of Freemasonry. Whigs seized on the Anti-Mason frenzy to launch harsh attacks on Jackson and Van Buren (both Freemasons), implying that the Democrats were part of the antidemocratic conspiracy. In the process, the Whigs presented themselves as opponents of aristocracy and exclusivity. They were attacking the Democrats with the Democrats’ own issues.
Religious and ethnic divisions also played an important role in determining the constituencies of the two parties. Irish and German Catholics, among the largest of the recent immigrant groups, tended to support the Democrats, who appeared to
Cultural share their own vague aversion to commer-Issues	cial development and entrepreneurial prog-
ress and who seemed to respect family- and community-centered values and habits. Evangelical Protestants gravitated toward the Whigs because they associated the party with constant development and improvement, goals their own faith embraced. These and other ethnic, religious, and cultural tensions were often more influential in determining party alignments than any concrete political or economic proposals.
The Whig Party was more successful at defining its positions and attracting a constituency than it was in uniting behind a national leader. No single person was ever able to command the loyalties of the party in the way Andrew Jackson did the Democrats. Instead, Whigs tended to divide their loyalties among three figures, each of whom was so substantial a figure that together they became known as the "Great Triumvirate”: Henry Clay, Daniel Webster, and John Calhoun.
Clay won support from many of those who favored his program for internal improvements and economic development, what he called the "American System”; but his image as a devious operator and his identification with the West proved to be serious liabilities. He ran for president three
times and never won. Daniel Webster, the greatest orator of his era, won broad support with his passionate speeches in defense of the Constitution and the Union; but his close connection with the Bank of the United States and the protective
Clay’s
American
System
246 CHAPTER 9
tariff, his reliance on rich men for financial support, and his excessive and often embarrassing fondness for brandy prevented him from developing enough of a national constituency to win him the office he so desperately wanted. John C. Calhoun, the third member of the Great Triumvirate, never considered himself a true Whig, and his identification with the nullification controversy in effect disqualified him from national leadership in any case. But he had tremendous strength in the South, supported a national bank, and shared with Clay and Webster a strong animosity toward Andrew Jackson.
The problems that emerged from this divided leadership became particularly clear in 1836. The Democrats were united behind Andrew Jackson’s personal choice for president, Martin Van Buren. The Whigs could not agree on a single candidate.
Instead, they ran several candidates, hoping to profit from the regional strength of each. Webster represented the party in New England; Hugh Lawson White of Tennessee ran in the South; and the former Indian fighter and hero of the War of 1812, William Henry Harrison, from Ohio, was the candidate in the middle states and the West. Party leaders hoped the three candidates
Election of 1836
Candidate (Party)	Electoral Vote	Popular Vote (%)
Martin Van Buren	170	765,483
(Democrat)		(50.9)
W. H.
Harrison 73 550,816 (Whig)		(36.6)
Hugh L. White	26	146,107
(Whig)		(9.7)
Daniel Webster	14	41,201
(Whig)		(2.7)
W. P.
Magnum 11 (Independent)		
THE ELECTION OF 1836
Martin Van Buren, who had served as vice president and secret of state for Andrew Jackson, was the Democratic candidate for president in 1836. His connection to the revered Jackson helped him easily defeat his Whig opponent, William Henry Harrison. Four yea later, the same two men contested the presidency, but that time it was Harrison who won. together might draw enough votes from Van Buren to prevent his getting a majority and throw the election to the House of Representatives, where the Whigs might be able to elect one of their own leaders. In the end, however, Van Buren won easily, with 170 electoral votes to 124 for all his opponents combined.
Van Buren ano the Panic of 1837
Andrew Jackson retired from public life in 1837, beloved by most Americans. Martin Van Buren was very different from his predecessor and far less fortunate. He was never able to match Jackson’s personal popularity, and his administration encountered economic difficulties that devastated the Democrats and helped the Whigs.
Van Buren’s success in the 1836 election was a result in part of a nationwide economic boom that was reaching its height in that year. Canal and railroad builders were at a peak of activity. Prices were rising, money was plentiful, and credit was easy as banks increased their loans and notes with little regard to their reserves of cash. The land business, in particular, was booming. Between 1835 and 1837, the government sold nearly 40 million acres of public land, nearly three-fourths of it to speculators, who purchased large tracts in hopes of reselling them at a profit. These land sales, along with revenues the government received from the tariff of 1833, created a series of substantial federal budget surpluses and made possible a steady reduction of the national debt (something Jackson had always advocated). From 1835 to 1837, the government for the first and only time in its history was out of debt, with a substantial surplus in the Treasury.
Congress and the administration now faced the question of what to do with the Treasury surplus. Reducing the tariff was not an option, since no one wanted to raise that thorny issue again. Instead, support grew for returning the federal surplus to
Distribution t^ie states- 1836, Congress passed a "dis-Act	tribution” act requiring the federal government
to pay its surplus funds to the states each year in four quarterly installments as interest-free, unsecured loans. No one expected the "loans” to be repaid. The states spent the money quickly, mainly to encourage construction of highways, railroads, and canals. The distribution of the surplus
thus gave further stimulus to the economic boom.
Congress did nothing to check the speculative fever, with
which many congressmen themselves were badly infected. Webster, for one, was buying up thousands of acres in the West. But Jackson, always suspicious of paper currency, was unhappy that the government was selling good land and receiving in return various state bank notes worth no more than the credit of the issuing bank.
In 1836, not long before leaving office, he issued a presidential order, the "specie circular.” It provided that in payment for public lands the government would accept only gold or silver coins or currency securely backed by gold or silver. Jackson was right to fear the speculative fever but wrong m thinking the specie circular would cure it. On the contrary, it produced a financial panic that began in the first months of
JACKSONIAN AMERICA
247
“THE TIMES,” 1837 This savage caricature of the economic troubles besetting the United States in 1837 illustrates, among other things, popular resentment of the hard-money orthodoxies of the time. A sign on the Custom House reads: "All bonds must be paid in Specie." Next door, the bank announces: "No specie payments made here.” Women and children are shown begging in the street, while unemployed workers stand shoeless in front of signs advertising loans and "grand schemes." (© Museum of the City of New York, USA/The Bridgeman Art Library)
Panic of 1837 Van Buren’s presidency. Hundreds of banks and businesses failed. Unemployment grew.
Bread riots broke out in some of the larger cities. Prices fell, especially the price of land. Many railroad and canal projects failed. Several of the debt-burdened state governments ceased to pay interest on their bonds, and a few repudiated their debts, at least temporarily. It was the worst depression in American history to that point, and it lasted for five years. It was a political catastrophe for Van Buren and the Democrats.
Both parties bore some responsibility for the panic. But the depression was only partly a result of American policies. England and western Europe were facing panics of their own, which caused European (and especially English) investors to withdraw funds from America, putting an added strain on American banks. A succession of crop failures on American farms reduced the purchasing power of farmers and required increased imports of food, which sent more money out of the country. But whatever its actual causes, the Panic of 1837 occurred during a Democratic administration, and the Democrats paid the political price for it. The Van Buren administration, which strongly opposed government intervention in the economy, did little to fight the depression. Some of the steps it took-borrowing money to pay government debts and
accepting only specie for payment of taxes-may have made things worse. Van Buren did succeed in establishing a ten-hour workday on all federal projects, by presidential order, but he had only a few legislative achievements.
The most important and controversial of them was the creation of a new financial system to replace the Bank of the United States. Under Van Buren’s plan, known as the "independent treasury” or "subtreasury” system, the government would Independent place its funds in an independent treasury
Treasury at Washington and in subtreasuries in other cities. No private banks would have the government’s money or name to use as a basis for specula-
tion; the government and the banks would be "divorced.”
Van Buren called a special session of Congress in 1837 to consider the proposal, which failed in the House. In 1840, the last year of Van Buren’s presidency, the administration finally succeeded in driving the measure through both houses of Congress.
The Log Cabin Campaign
As the campaign of 1840 approached, the Whigs realized that they would have to settle on one candidate for president this time if they were to have any hope of winning. As a
248 « CHAPTER 9
result, they held their first national nominating convention in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, in December 1839. Passing over the controversial Henry Clay, who had expected the nomination, the convention chose William Henry Harrison and, for vice president, John Tyler of Virginia. Harrison was a descendant of the Virginia aristocracy but had spent his adult life in the Northwest. He was a renowned soldier, a famous Indian fighter, and a popular national figure. The Democrats nominated Van Buren. But because they were not much more united than the Whigs, they failed to nominate a vice presidential candidate, leaving the choice of that office to the electors.
The 1840 campaign was the first in which the new popular "penny press” carried news of the candidates to a large audience of workers and tradespeople. It also illustrated how fully the concept of party competition, the NEW	subordination of ideology to immediate
Techniques political needs, had established itself in of Political America. The Whigs represented the af-Campaigning fluent elements of the population, and they favored government policies that would aid business. But they presented themselves in 1840 as the party of the common people. So, of course, did the
Democrats. Both parties used the same techniques of mass voter appeal, the same evocation of simple, rustic values. What mattered now was not the philosophical purity of the party but its ability to win votes. The Whig campaign was particularly effective in portraying William Henry Harrison, a wealthy member of the frontier elite with a considerable estate, as a simple man of the people who loved log cabins and hard cider. They accused Van Buren of being an aloof aristocrat who used cologne, drank champagne, and ate from gold plates. The Democrats had no defense against the combination of these campaign techniques and the effects of the depression. Harrison won the election with 234 electoral votes to 60 for Van Buren and with a popular vote majority of 53 percent.
The Frustration of the Whigs
Despite their decisive victory, the Whigs found their four years in power frustrating and divisive. In large part, that was because their popular new president, "Old Tippecanoe,” William Henry Harrison, died of pneumonia one month after taking office. Vice President Tyler succeeded him. Control of the administration thus fell to a man with whom the Whig party leadership had weak ties. Harrison had generally deferred
HARRISON AND REFORM
This hand-colored engraving was made for a brass brooch during the 1840 presidential campaign and served the same purposes that modern campaign buttons do. It conveys Harrison's presumably humble beginnings in a log cabin. In reality, Harrison was a wealthy, aristocratic man; but the unpopularity of the aristocratic airs of his opponent, President Martin Van Buren, persuaded the Whig Party that it would be good political strategy to portray Harrison as a humble "man of the people." (© David J. & Janice L. Frent Collection/Corbis) Candidate (Party)	Electoral Vote (%)	Popular Vote (%)
William Henry Harrison	234	1,275,016
(Whig)	(80)	(53)
Martin Van Buren	60	1,129,102
(Democratic)	(20)	(47)
Nonvoting territories		
Not U.S. territory		
THE ELECTION OF 1840
President Martin Van Buren was defeated in 1840 despite his c ose relationship to the popular former president, Andrew Jackson. Van Buren, unlike Jackson, was president during a sharp economic recession. And even though his opponent, William Henry Harrison was a wealthy frontier aristocrat, the Whig Party effectively portrayed him as a humble man o t e people, a contrast to what they claimed was Van Buren's extravagance and elitism. JACKSONIAN AMERICA
• 249 I A BEAUT IF ILL GOBLET OF
j I WHITE-HOUSE CHAMFAGNF j f AN UGLY”MfJG OF log-caejhhaed cider
AN ATTACK ON VAN BUREN
This "pull card," made during the 1840 presidential campaign, which Van Buren lost to William Henry Harrison, satirizes the president as an aristocratic dandy. The card displays Van Buren grinning while he drinks champagne in the White House. Pulling a tab on the card changes his champagne glass to a mug of hard cider (with Harrison's initials on it) and changes his expression from delight to revulsion. (© The Granger Collection, New York) to Henry Clay and Daniel Webster, whom he named secretary of state. Under Tyler, things quickly changed.
Tyler was a former Democrat who had left the party in reaction to what he considered Jackson’s excessively egalitarian program and imperious methods. But there were still signs of his Democratic past in his approach to public policy. The president did agree to bills abolishing Van Buren’s independent treasury system and raising tariff rates. But he refused to support Clay’s attempt to recharter a Bank of the United States. And he vetoed several internal improvement bills that Clay Whigs B.gak “1 — congression.! Whigs sponsor^
with Tyler Finally, a conference of cong
Whigs read Tyler out of the party. Every
cabinet member but Webster resigned; five former Democrats took their places. When Webster, too, left the cabinet, Ty er appointed Calhoun, who had rejoined the Democratic Party, to replace him.
A new political alignment was emerging. Tyler and a small band of conservative southern Whigs were preparing to rejoin the Democrats. Joining the "common man’s party” of Jackson and Van Buren was a faction with decidedly aristocratic political ideas, who thought that government had an obligation to protect and even expand the institution of slavery, and who believed in states’ rights with almost fanatical devotion.
Whig Diplomacy
In the midst of these domestic controversies, a series of incidents in the late 1830s brought Great Britain and the United States once again to the brink of war. Residents of the eastern provinces of Canada launched a rebellion against the British colonial government in 1837, and some of the rebels chartered an American steamship, the Caroline, to ship supplies across
The Penny Press
r September 3,1833, a small newspaper appeared in New York City for the first time: the New York Sun, published by a young former apprentice from Massachusetts named Benjamin Day.
Four pages long, it contained mostly trivial local news, with particular emphasis on sex, crime, and violence.
It sold for a penny, launching a new age in the his-
THE NEW YORK SUN
This 1834 front page of The Sun, which had begun publication a year earlier, contains advertisements, human interest stories, a description of a slave auction in Charleston, S.C., and homespun advice: "Life is short. The poor pittance of several years is not worth being a villain for." (© Collection of the New-York Historical Society) tory of American journalism, the age of the penny press."
Before the advent of the penny press, newspapers in America were far too expensive for most ordinary citizens to buy. But several important changes in the business of journalism and the character of American society paved the way for Benjamin Day and others to challenge the established press. New technologies— the steam-powered cylinder printing press, new machines for making paper, railroads and canals for distributing issues to a larger market-made it possible to publish newspapers inexpensively and to sell them widely. A rising popular literacy rate, a result in part of the spread of public education, created a bigger reading public.
The penny press was also a response to the changing culture of the 1820s and 1830s. The spread of an urban, market economy contributed to the growth of the penny press by drawing a large population of workers, artisans, and clerks into large cities, where they became an important
market for the new papers. The spirit of democracy-symbolized by the popularity of Andrew Jackson and the rising numbers of white male voters across the country—helped create an appetite for journalism that spoke to and for "the people." Hence Benjamin Day's slogan for his new paper: "It Shines for ALL." The Sun and papers like it were committed to feeding the appetites of the people of modest means, who constituted most of their readership. "Human interest stories" helped solidify their hold on the working public, Condescending stories about poor black men and women—ridiculing their subjects' illiteracy and their accents—were also popular among these papers' virtually all-white readership.
Within six months of its first issue, the Sun had the largest circulation in New York—8,000 readers, more than twice the number of its nearest competitors. James Gordon Bennett's New York Herold, which began publication in 1835, soon surpassed the Sun in popularity with its lively combination of sensationalism and local gossip and with its aggressive pursuit of national and international stories. The Herald pioneered a "letters to the editor" column, was the first paper to have regular reviews of books and the arts, and launched the first daily sports section. By 1860, its circulation of more than 77,000 was the largest of any daily newspaper in the world.
The Caroline Affair
the Niagara River to them from New York. British authorities in Canada seized the Caroline and burned it, killing one American in the process. The British government refused either to disavow the attack or to provide compensation for it, and resentment in the United States ran high. But the British soon had reasons for anger as well. Authorities in New York, attempting to exploit the Caroline affair, arrested a Canadian named Alexander McLeod and charged him with the murder
of the American who had died in the incident. The British government, expressing majestic rage, insisted that McLeod could not be accused of murder because he had acted under official orders. The foreign secretary, the bellicose Lord Palmerston, demanded McLeod’s release and threatened that his execution would bring "immediate and frightful” war.
Webster as secretary of state did not think McLeod was worth a war, but he was powerless to release him. The prisoner was under New York jurisdiction and had to be tried in the state courts, a peculiarity of American jurisprudence that the
British did not seem to understand. A New York jury did what Webster could not: it defused the crisis by acquitting McLeod.
At the same time, tensions flared over the boundary between Canada and Maine, which had been in dispute since
Aroostook the TreatV of 1783- ln 1838' §rouPs °f War	Americans and Canadians, mostly lumber
jacks, began moving into the Aroostook
River region in the disputed area, precipitating a violent brawl between the two groups that became known as the "Aroostook War.”
Several years later, there were yet more Anglo-American problems. In 1841, an American ship, the Creole, sailed from Virginia for New Orleans with more than 100 slaves aboard. En route the slaves mutinied, took possession of the ship, and took it to the Bahamas. British officials there declared the slaves free, and the English government refused to overrule them. Many Americans, especially southerners, were furious.
At this critical juncture, a new government eager to re duce the tensions with the United States came to power in
THE LEXINGTON BLOWS!
This image in the New York Sun was one of the first examples of large and (in this case at least) lurid illustration in the daily press. This dramatic picture depicts an event that took place on the Long Island Sound in 1840. (The Library of Congress (LC-USZ62-2527)) The newspapers of the penny press initiated the process of turning journalism into a profession. They were the first to pay their reporters and the first to rely heavily on advertisements, often devoting up to half their space to paid advertising. They tended to be sensationalist and opinionated, but they were often also aggressive in uncovering serious and important news—in police stations, courts, jails, streets, and private homes as well as in city halls, state capitals, Washington, D.C., and the world. •
UNDERSTAND. AN
At V, A, AMf ev/AUJAnr
Not all the new penny papers were as sensationalist as the Sun and the Herald. Both the Philadelphia Public Ledger and the Baltimore Sun, founded in 1836 and 1837 respectively, strove to provide serious coverage of the news. The Baltimore Sun even developed a Washington bureau, the first of the penny papers to do so. The New York Tribune, founded in 1841 by Horace Greeley, prided itself on serious reporting and commentary, all of it tinged with a conspicuous sympathy for socialism and for the aspirations of working people. As serious as the Tribune, but more sober and self-consciously ''objective" in its reportage, was the New York Times, which Henry Raymond founded in 1851. "We do not mean to write as if we were in a passion—unless that shall really be the case,” the Times huffily proclaimed in its first issue, in an obvious reference to Greeley and his impassioned reportage; and we shall make it a point to get into a passion as rarely as possible.”
1.	How were the penny press newspapers a product of the Jacksonian era?
2.	Before the advent of the penny press, newspapers in America were aimed at a much narrower audience. Some published mainly business news, and others worked to advance the aims of a political party. What nationally circulated newspapers and other media today continue this tradition?
3.	What characteristics of penny press newspapers are still common in newspapers today? In what other contemporary news media do you see these same (or similar) elements?
Webster-
Ashburton
Treaty
Great Britain. In the spring of 1842, it sent Lord Ashburton, an admirer of America, to negotiate an agreement on the Maine boundary and other matters. The result of his negotiations with Secretary of State Webster and representatives from Maine and Massachusetts was the Webster-Ashburton Treaty of 1842. Its
terms established a firm northern boundary between the United States and Canada along the Maine-New Brunswick border that survives to this day; the new border gave the United States a bit more than half of the previously disputed territory. Other, smaller provisions placated Maine and Massachusetts and protected critical trade routes in both the northern United States and southern Canada. In a separate exchange of notes, Ashburton eased the memory of the Caroline and Creole affairs by expressing regret and promising no fu ture "officious interference” with American ships.
During the Tyler administration, the United States established its first diplomatic relations with China. In 1842,
Treaty of Britain forced China to open certain ports
Wang Hya t0 foreign trade. Eager to share the new privileges, American mercantile interests persuaded Tyler and Congress to send a commissioner-Caleb Cushing-to China to negotiate a treaty giving the United States some part in the China trade. In the Treaty of Wang Hya, concluded in 1844, Cushing secured most-fa-vored-nation provisions giving Americans the same privileges as the English. He also won for Americans the right of "extraterritoriality” the right of Americans accused of crimes in China to be tried by American, not Chinese, officials. In the next ten years, American trade with China
steadily increased.
In their diplomatic efforts, at least, the Whigs were able to secure some important successes. But by the end of the Tyler administration, the party could look back on few other victories. In the election of 1844, the Whigs lost the White House. They were to win only one more national election in their history.
251
252 CHAPTER 9
LOOKING BACK
The election of Andrew Jackson to the presidency in 1828 marked not only the triumph of a particular vision of government and democracy. It represented as well the emergence of a new
Jackson's political world. Throughout the American Legacy	nation, the laws governing political participa-
tion were loosening and the number of people permitted to vote (which eventually included most white males, but almost no one else) was increasing. Along with this expansion of the electorate was emerging a new spirit of party politics. Parties had once been reviled by American leaders as contributing to the spirit of faction. Now a new set of ideas was emerging that saw in institutionalized parties not a challenge, but a contribution to democracy. Party competition would be a way of containing and muting disagreements that might otherwise run amok. It would be another of the healthy restraints-another part of the system of checks and balances-that made
American government work.
Andrew Jackson was a party man, and he set out as president to entrench his party, the Democrats, in power. He was also a fierce defender of his region, the West, and a sharp critic of what
he considered the stranglehold of the aristocratic East on the nation’s economic life. He sought to limit the role of the federal government in economic affairs, fearful that it would serve to entrench existing patterns of wealth and power. He worked to destroy the Bank of the United States, which he considered a corrupt vehicle of aristocratic influence. Jackson was, finally, a nationalist. And he confronted the greatest challenge to American unity yet to have emerged in the young nation-the nullification crisis of 1832-1833-with a strong assertion of the power and importance of the Union. These positions won Jackson broad popularity and ensured his reelection in 1832 and the election of his designated successor, Martin Van Buren, in 1836.
But the Democrats were not the only ones to have learned the lessons of the age of parties. A new coalition of anti-Jacksonians, who called themselves the Whigs, launched a powerful new party that used much of the same anti-elitist rhetoric the Democrats had used to win support for their own much more nationalist program. Their emergence culminated in the campaign of 1840 with the election of the first Whig president.
Key Terms/People/Places/Events
Andrew Jackson 230 Anti-Masonry 245 Aroostook War 250 Bank War 242 Caroline affair 250 Daniel Webster 231 Dorr Rebellion 231 ’’Five Civilized Tribes” 239 Indian Territory 240
John C. Calhoun 246 John Tyler 248 Martin Van Buren 233 Nicholas Biddle 242 Nullification 235 Panic of 1837 246 Removal Act 239 Roger B. Taney 243 Seminole War 241
Specie circular 246
Spoils system 234
Trail of Tears 240
Webster-Ashburton Treaty 251 Webster-Hayne debate 236 Whigs 234
William Henry Harrison 246
RECALL AND REFLECT
1.	What was Andrew Jackson’s political philosophy, and how was it reflected in the policies and actions of his administration?
2.	Who benefited under Jacksonian democracy?
Who suffered?
3.	How did Andrew Jackson change the office of the presidency?
4.	Who supported and who opposed the Bank of the United States, and why? Who was right?
5.	How and why did white attitudes toward Native Americans change, and how did these changes lead to the Indian Removal Act and the Trail of Tears?
JACKSONIAN AMERICA - 253
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
1828	■ •		1835-1842	•	
Calhoun's South Carolina			Seminole War		
Exposition and Protest outlines					
nullification doctrine	•	1829		A	1836
		Andrew Jackson inaugurated		9 ’	Jackson issues "specie circular"
					Martin Van Buren elected
1830	•		1837-1842	A	president
Webster and Hayne debate			Commercial panic		
Indian Removal Act passed			and depression		
_	1830-1838	_	1838
Indians expelled from Southeast	"Aroostook War" fought in Maine and Canada
1831
Anti-Mason Party established
1832-1833
Nullification crisis erupts
1832
Democrats hold first national party convention
Jackson vetoes bill to recharter Bank of the United States Jackson reelected president
1835
Roger B. Taney succeeds Marshall as chief justice of the Supreme Court
Whigs hold their first national convention
1841
Harrison dies
John Tyler becomes president
1840
William Henry Harrison elected president
1842
Dorr Rebellion hastens reform in Rhode Island
Webster-Ashburton Treaty signed
AMERICA’S
ECONOMIC
REVOLUTION
If
LOOKING AHEAD
1.	What were the factors in the U.S. economic revolution of the mid-nineteenth century?
2.	How did the U.S. population change between 1820 and 1840, and how did the population change affect the nation's economy, society, and politics?
3.	Why did America's industrial revolution affect the northern economy and society differently than it did the southern economy and society?
THE LOWELL MILLS
Fifteen years earlier, Lowell, Massachusetts, had been a small farming village known as East Chelmsford. By the 1840s, when Fitzhugh Lane painted The Middlesex Comply Woolen Mills, the town had become one of the most famous manufacturing centers in America and a magnet for visitors from around the world. Lanes painting shows female workers, who dominated the labor force in Lowell, entering the factory, (c American Textile History Museum} SETTING THE STAGE
WHEN THE UNITED STATES ENTERED THE WAR OF 1812,
it was still an essentially agrarian nation. There were, to be sure, cities in America, several of substantial size, and there was modest but growing manufacturing activity. But the overwhelming majority of Americans were farmers and tradespeople, and the economy was largely a local one. By the time the Civil War began in 1861, the United States had transformed itself. Most Americans were still rural people, but even most American farmers were now part of a national, and increasingly international, market economy as well as a growing urbanized nation. The United States had developed a major manufacturing sector and was beginning to challenge the industrial nations of Europe for supremacy. The nation had experienced the first stage of its industrial revolution.
The dramatic changes that resulted from the industrial revolution affected the nations economy, society, culture, and politics, but the changes did not have the same impact everywhere. The Northeast and the Northwest were rapidly developing a complex, modern economy and society, increasingly dominated by large cities, important manufacturing, and profitable commercial farming. It was in many ways an unequal society, but it was also a fluid one, firmly committed to the ideal of free labor.
In the South and Southwest, there were changes, too. Southern agriculture, particularly cotton farming,
„	flourished as never before in response to the qrowinq demand from textile mills in New
Regional
Divergences England and elsewhere. But the South remained much less economically developed than the North. As the North became ever more committed to the fluidity and mobility of its free-labor system, the South was becoming more and more resolute in its defense of slavery. The economic
revolution was transforming the nation. It was also dividing it.
THE CHANGING AMERICAN POPULATION
The American industrial revolution was a result of many factors. Before it could occur, the United States needed a population large enough both to grow its own food and to provide a surplus workforce for an industrial economy. It needed a transportation and communications system capable of sustaining commerce over a large geographic area. It needed the technology to permit manufacturing on a large scale. And it needed systems of business organization capable of managing large industrial enterprises. By 1860, the northern regions of the nation had acquired at least the beginnings of all those things.
The American Population, 1820-1840
Three trends characterized the American population between 1820 and 1840, all of them contributing in various ways to economic growth. The population was increasing rapidly; much of it was moving from the countryside into the industrializing cities of the Northeast and Northwest; and much of it was migrating westward.
The American population had stood at only 4 million in 1790. By 1820, it had reached 10 million;
by 1830 nearly 13 million; and by 1840, 17 million. The United States was growing much more
rapidly in population than Britain or Europe. One reason for this substantial population growth
was improvements in public health. The number and ferocity of epidemics
(such as the great cholera plague of 1832)- which had periodically decimated
urban and even rural populations in America-slowly declined, as did the
nation’s mortality rate. The population increase was also a result of a high birth
, .	„ on average of 6.14 children each, a decline from the very high
rate. In 1840, white women bore an average ui u	j &
Reasons for Population Increase
but still substantial enough to produce rapid population increases,
rates of the eighteenth century
particularly srnce a larger proportion of children could expect to grow ,o adulthood than had been the case a generation or two earlier.
255
