734 ■ CHAPTER 27
Wartime Diplomacy
Serious strains had already begun to develop in the alliance with the Soviet Union in January 1943, when Roosevelt and Churchill met in Casablanca, Morocco, to discuss Allied strategy. (Stalin had declined Roosevelt’s invitation to attend.) The two leaders could not accept Stalin’s most important demand-the immediate opening of a second front in western Europe. But they tried to reassure Stalin by announcing that they would accept nothing less than the unconditional surrender of the Axis powers, thus indicating that they would not negotiate a separate peace with Hitler and leave the Soviets to fight on alone.
In November 1943, Roosevelt and Churchill traveled to Teheran, Iran, for their first meeting with Stalin. By now, however, Roosevelt’s most effective bargaining tool- Stalin’s need for American assistance in his struggle against Germany-had been largely removed. The German advance against Russia had been halted; Soviet forces were now launching their own westward offensive. Nevertheless, the Teheran Conference seemed in most respects a success. Roosevelt and Stalin established a cordial personal relationship. Stalin agreed to an American request that the Soviet Union enter the war in the Pacific soon after the end of hostilities in Europe. Roosevelt, in turn, promised that an Anglo-American second front would be established within six months.
On other matters, however, the origins of future disagreements were already visible. Most important was the question of the future of Poland. Roosevelt and Churchill were willing to agree to a movement of the Soviet border westward, allowing
Stalin to annex some historically Polish territory. But on the nature of the postwar government in the rest of Poland, there were sharp differences. Roosevelt and
D1SPolap4DZER Churchill supported the claims of the Polish government-in-exile that had been functioning in London since 1940; Stalin wished to install another pro-communist exiled government that had spent the war in Lublin, in the Soviet Union. The three leaders avoided a bitter conclusion to the Teheran Conference only by leaving the issue
i -i v-\	r» lx	z~n
Yalta
More than a year later, in February 1945, Roosevelt joined Churchill and Stalin for a peace conference in the Soviet city of Yalta-a resort on the Black Sea that was once a summer palace for the tsars. On a number of issues, the "Big Three,” as Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin were known, reached agreements. In return for Stalin’s renewed promise to enter the Pacific war, Roosevelt agreed that the Soviet Union should receive some of the territory in the Pacific that Russia had lost in the 1904 Russo-Japanese War.
The negotiators also agreed to a plan for a new international organization, a plan that had been hammered out the previous T T	summer at a conference in Washington, D.C.,
Nations at t*ie Dumbarton Oaks estate. The new
United Nations would contain a General Assembly, in which every member would be represented, and a Security Council, with permanent representatives of the five
YALTA
Churchill, Roosevelt, and Stalin (known during the war as the "Big Three”) meet at Yalta in the Crimea in February 1945 to come. Instead, they settled on a series of vague compromises that ultimately left all parties feeling betrayed. (© Bettmann/Corbis) try to agree on the outlines of the peace that they knew was soon to
THE COLD WAR * 735
major powers (the United States, Britain, France, the Soviet Union, and China), each of which would have veto power. The Security Council would also have temporary delegates from several other nations. These agreements became the basis of the United Nations charter, drafted at a conference of fifty nations beginning April 25, 1945, in San Francisco. The U.S. Senate ratified the charter in July by a vote of 80 to 2 (in striking contrast to the slow and painful defeat it had administered to the charter of the League of Nations twenty-five years before).
On other issues, however, the Yalta Conference produced no real accord. Basic disagreement remained about the postwar Polish government. Stalin, whose armies now occupied Poland, had already installed a government composed of the pro-communist "Lublin” Poles. Roosevelt and Churchill insisted that the pro-Western "London” Poles must be allowed a place in the Warsaw regime. Roosevelt envisioned a government based on free, democratic elections-which both he and Stalin recognized the pro-Western forces would win. Stalin agreed only to a vague compromise by which an unspecified number of pro-Western Poles would be granted a place in the government. He reluctantly consented to hold "free and unfettered elections” in Poland on an unspecified future date. They did not take place for almost fifty years.
Nor was there agreement about the future of Germany.
Roosevelt seemed to want a reconstructed and reunited
Germany. Stalin wanted to impose heavy reparations on
Germany and to ensure a permanent dismemberment of the
nation. The final agreement was, like the Polish accord, vague
and unstable. The decision on reparations Disagreements , , , c , r	. .
over Germany would be referred to a future commission.
The United States, Great Britain, France, and the Soviet Union would each control its own "zone of occupation” in Germany-the zones to be determined by the position of troops at the end of the war. Berlin, the German capital, was already well inside the Soviet zone, but because of its symbolic importance it would be divided into four sectors, one for each nation to occupy. At an unspecified date, Germany would be reunited; but there was no agreement on how the reunification would occur. As for the rest of Europe, the conference produced a murky accord on the establishment of governments "broadly representative of all democratic elements” and "responsible to the will of the people.”
The Yalta accords, in other words, were less a settlement of postwar issues than a set of loose principles that sidestepped the most difficult questions. Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin returned home from the conference each apparently convinced that he had signed an important agreement. But the Soviet interpretation of the accords differed so sharply from the Anglo-American interpretation that the illusion endured only briefly. In the weeks following the Yalta Conference, Roosevelt watched with growing alarm as the Soviet Union moved systematically to establish pro-communist governments in one Central or Eastern European nation after another and as Stalin refused to make the changes in Poland that the president believed he had promised.
But Roosevelt did not abandon hope. Still believing the dif-
ferences could be settled, he left Washington early in the spring
for a vacation at his retreat in Warm Springs, Georgia. There, on April 12, 1945, he suffered a sudden, massive stroke and died.
THE COLLAPSE OF THE PEACE
Harry S. Truman, who succeeded Roosevelt in the presidency, had little familiarity with international issues. And he did not share Roosevelt’s apparent faith in the flexibility of the Soviet Union. Roosevelt had hoped that Stalin was a reasonable man with whom an ultimate accord might be reached. Truman, in contrast, sided with those in the government (and there were many) who considered the Soviet Union fundamentally untrustworthy and who viewed Stalin with suspicion and even loathing.
The Failure of Potsdam
Truman had been in office only a few days before he decided to, as he put it, "get tough” with the Soviet Union. Truman met on April 23 with Soviet foreign minister Molotov and sharply
Truman’s chastised him for violations of the Yalta "Get Tough” accords. In fact, Truman had only limited Policy	leverage by which to compel the Soviet
Union to carry out its agreements. Truman insisted that the United States should be able to get "85 percent” of what it wanted, but he was ultimately forced to settle for much less.
Truman conceded first on Poland. When Stalin made a few minor concessions to the pro-Western exiles, Truman recognized the Warsaw government, hoping that noncommunist forces might gradually expand their influence there. Until the 1980s, they did not. Other questions remained, above all the question of Germany. To settle them, Truman met in July at Potsdam, in Russian-occupied Germany, with Churchill (who, after elections in Britain in the midst of the talks, was replaced as prime minister by Clement Attlee) and Stalin. Truman reluctantly accepted the adjustments of the Polish-German border that Stalin had long demanded; he refused, however, to permit the Russians to claim any reparations from the American, French, and British zones of Germany. This stance effectively confirmed that Germany would remain divided, with the western zones united into one nation, friendly to the United States, and the Russian zone surviving as another nation, with a Soviet-dominated, communist government.
Ihe China Problem
Zentral to American hopes for an open, peaceful world "policed” )y the great powers was a strong, independent China. But even )efore the war ended, the American government was aware that those hopes faced a major, perhaps insurmountable, obstacle: the Chinese government of Chiang Kai-shek. Chiang was
merally friendly to the United States, but his government was >rrupt and incompetent with feeble popular support, and
Chiang Kai shek

DEBATING THE PAST

Origins of the Cold War
m fj TJ Cold War may be over, but the debate over its origins is not.
X il Ju For more than a decade after the end of World War II, few historians in the United States challenged the official American interpretation of the beginnings of the Cold War. Most students of the conflict agreed that relations with the Soviet Union broke down because Stalin violated the Yalta accords and because he was spreading communism throughout the world.
Not long after the war, as communism was spreading in Europe, George F. Kennan wrote an important telegraph arguing that the Soviet Union needed to be ''contained," that while the United States should not invade communist nations it should work to stop their growing influence. Over time, he suggested, containment would weaken the Soviet Union.
In debates from the 1950s on, scholars began to offer different, more critical views about the Cold War. William Appleman Williams, writing in The Tragedy of American Diplomacy (1959), disagreed with the containment theory. The Cold War, he said, was simply the most recent version of a consistent American effort in the twentieth century to maintain an "open door" for American trade in world markets. According to Williams, the confrontation with the Soviet Union was less a response to Russian aggressive designs than an expression of the American belief in the necessity of capitalist expansion.
Later revisionists modified Williams's claims, but most accepted his basic outlook. The United States had been primarily to blame for the Cold War, many scholars asserted. Claims were made that the Soviet Union was too weak and exhausted at the end of World War II to pose a serious threat to America; that the United States used its nuclear monopoly to threaten and intimidate Stalin; that Harry Truman recklessly abandoned the conciliatory tone taken by Franklin Roosevelt (who died in 1945), taking instead a provocative hard line against the Russians, The Soviet response, these scholars

(National Archives and Records Administration)
Chiang was unable or unwilling to face the problems that were threatening to engulf him. Since 1927, the nationalist government he headed had been engaged in a prolonged and bitter rivalry with the communist armies of Mao Zedong. So successful had the communist challenge grown that Mao was in control of one-fourth of the population by 1945.
Some Americans urged the government to find a "third force” to support as an alternative to either Chiang or Mao. A few argued that the United States should try to reach some accommodation with Mao. Truman, however, decided reluctantly that he had no choice but to continue supporting Chiang. For the next several years, as the long struggle between the nationalists and the communists erupted into a full-scale civil war, the United States continued to send money and weapons to Chiang. Eventually, Truman sent General George Marshall, former army chief of staff and future secretary of state, to study the Chinese problem and recommend a policy for the United States. Many American friends in China-known generally as the China Lobby-pressured Marshall to expand the American military presence as a way to combat the continuing expansion of communist control. Marshall came to believe that nothing short of an all-out war with China would be necessary to defeat the communists, and he was unwilling
to recommend that the president should accept such a war. That decision was the source of many embittered attacks on Marshall, Truman, and many others for decades to come.
Instead, the American government was beginning to consider an alternative to China as the strong, pro-Western force in Asia:
Restoring	a revived Japan. Abandoning the strict
Japan	occupation policies of the first years after
the war (when General Douglas MacArthur had governed the nation), the United States lifted restrictions on industrial development and encouraged rapid economic growth in Japan. The vision of an open, united world was giving way in Asia, as it was in Europe, to an acceptance of a divided
world with a strong, pro-American sphere of influence.
The Containment Doctrine
By the end of 1945, any realistic hope of a postwar world constructed according to the Atlantic Charter ideals that Roosevelt and Churchill had agreed upon was in shambles. Instead, a new American policy, known as containment, was slowly emerging. Rather than attempting to create a unified, "open” world, the United States and its allies would work to "contain” the threat of further Soviet expansion.
736
asserted, reflected a legitimate fear of capitalist encirclement. Walter LaFeber, in America, Russia, and the Cold War, 1945-1966 (1967 and later editions), maintained that America's supposedly idealistic internationalism at the close of the war was in reality an effort to ensure a world shaped in the American image that would guarantee its influence, especially regarding trade.
Ultimately, the revisionist interpretation began to produce a reaction of its own, a "postrevisionist" view of the conflict. Some manifestations of this reaction consisted of little more than a reaffirmation of the traditional view of the Cold War, but the dominant works of postrevisionist scholarship attempted to strike a balance between the two camps, to identify areas of blame and misperception on both sides of the conflict. Thomas G. Paterson, in Soviet-American Confrontation (1973), viewed Russian hostility and American efforts to dominate the postwar world as equally responsible for the Cold War. John Lewis Gaddis, in The United States and the Origins of the Cold War, 1941-1947 (1972) and other works, similarly maintained that neither side can bear sole responsibility for the onset of the Cold War. American policymakers, he argued, had only limited options because of the pressures of domestic politics. And Stalin was immobilized by his obsessive concern with maintaining his own power and ensuring absolute security for the Soviet Union. But if neither side was entirely to blame, Gaddis concluded, the Soviets must be held more accountable for the problems, for Stalin was in a much better position to compromise, given his broader power within his own government, than the politically hamstrung Truman. Melvyn Leffler's Preponderance of Power (1991) argued similarly that American policymakers genuinely believed in the existence of a Soviet threat and were determined to remain consistently stronger than the Soviets in response.
A more complex view of the Cold War has emerged out of the postrevisionist literature. The Cold War, historians now suggest, was not so much the fault of one side or the other as it was the natural, perhaps inevitable, result of tensions between the world's two most powerful nations—nations that had been suspicious of, if not hostile toward, one another for nearly a century. "The United States and the Soviet Union were doomed to be antagonists," Ernest May wrote in 1984. "There probably was never any real possibility that the post-1945 relationship could be anything but hostility verging on conflict."
Since the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, scholars have had access to Russian archives that have enriched—though not fundamentally changed—the way historians view the Cold War. John Lewis Gaddis, in We Now Know: Rethinking Cold War History (1998) and The Cold War: A History (2005), argues that the strong anticommunist positions of Margaret Thatcher, Ronald Reagan, and Pope John Paul II had a larger impact on the weakening of the Soviet Union than was previously understood. In The Global Cold War (2005), Arne Westad, also making use of the released archives,
roots the origins of the dangerous instability in the so-called Third World in the frequent interventions of both the Soviet Union and the United States in the Cold War era. And John Lewis Gaddis, in The Cold War: A History, looks back on the Cold War that he chronicled for several decades in the midst of the Cold War. He argues that, despite all the anxieties it raised and all the violence it helped to create, the containment policy that shaped American foreign policy beginning in the mid-1940s was ultimately a significant success. •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
1 What are the traditional and revisionist arguments concerning the origins of the Cold War?
2.	How does the postrevisionist view differ from the traditional and revisionist interpretations?
3.	Was the Cold War inevitable?
Truman
Doctrine
The new doctrine emerged in part as a response to events in Europe in 1946. In Turkey, Stalin was trying to win control over the vital sea lanes to the Mediterranean. In Greece, communist forces were threatening the pro-Western government. The British had announced they could no longer provide assistance.
Faced with these challenges, Truman decided to enunciate a firm new policy. In doing so, he drew from the ideas of the influential American diplomat George F. Kennan, who had warned not long after the war that the only appropriate diplomatic approach to dealing with the Soviet Union was "a longterm, patient but firm and vigilant containment of Russian expansive tendencies.” On March 12, 1947, Truman appeared before Congress and used Kennan's warnings as the basis of what became known as the Truman Doctrine. "I believe, he argued, "that it must be the policy of the United States to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures.” In the same speech he requested $400 million-part of it to bolster the armed forces of Greece and Turkey, another part to provide economic assistance to Greece. Congress quickly approved the measure.
The American commitment ultimately helped ease Soviet
pressure on Turkey and helped the Greek government defeat
the communist insurgents. More important, it established a basis for American foreign policy that would survive for more than forty years.
The Marshall Plan
An integral part of the containment policy was a proposal to aid in the economic reconstruction of Western Europe. There were many motives: humanitarian concern for the European people; a fear that Europe would remain an
^^jrope46 economic drain on the United States if it could not quickly rebuild and begin to feed itself; a desire for a strong European market for American goods. But above all, American policymakers believed that unless something could be done to strengthen the shaky pro-American governments in Western Europe, those governments might fall under the control of rapidly growing domestic
communist parties.
In June 1947, therefore, Secretary of State George C. Marshall announced a plan to provide economic assistance to all European nations (including the Soviet Union) that would join in drafting a program for recovery. Although Russia and its Eastern satellites quickly and predictably rejected the plan,
73
738
CHAPTER 27

peace-mongerim;

SALUTING THE MARSHALL PLAN
In another age, a chimney spouting smoke would evoke environmental damage. But in the aftermath of World War II, the rebuilding of Europe's industrial capacity was a great achievement—helped by (and celebrated by) the United States and the Marshall Plan. (© The Granger
Collection, New York)
Mobilization at Home
That the United States had accepted a continuing commitment to the containment policy became clear in 1947 and 1948 through a series of measures designed to maintain American military power at near wartime levels. In 1948, at President Truman’s request, Congress approved a new military draft and revived the Selective Service System. In the meantime, the United States, having failed to reach agreement with the Soviet Union on international control of nuclear weapons, redoubled its own efforts in atomic research, elevating nuclear weaponry to a central place in its military arsenal. The Atomic Energy Commission, established in 1946, became the supervisory body charged with overseeing all nuclear research, both civilian and military. And in 1950, the Truman administration approved the development of the new hydrogen bomb, a nuclear weapon far more powerful than the bombs the United States had used in 1945.
The National Security Act of 1947 reshaped the nation’s major military and diplomatic institutions. It created a new Department of Defense to oversee all branches of the armed services, combining functions previously performed separately by the War and Navy Departments. A
National Security Council (NSC), operating out of the White House, would oversee foreign and military policy. A Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) would replace the wartime Office of
National Security Act of 1947
sixteen Western European nations eagerly participated. Whatever domestic opposition to the plan there was in the United States largely vanished after a sudden coup in Czechoslovakia in February 1948 that established a Soviet-dominated communist government there. In April, Congress approved the creation of the Economic Cooperation Administration, the agency that would administer the Marshall Plan, as it became known. Over the next three years, the Marshall Plan channeled over $12 billion of American aid into Europe, helping to spark a substantial economic revival. By the end of 1950, European industrial production had risen 64 percent, communist strength in the member nations had declined, and opportunities for American trade had revived.
SURVIVING NUCLEAR WAR
Preoccupation with the possibility of a nuclear war reached a fever pitch in the first years of the atomic era. The Federal Civil Defense Agency, which in 1950 issued these simple rules for civilians to follow in dealing with an atomic attack, was one of many organizations attempting to convince the American public that a nuclear war was survivable. (Federal Civil Defense Agency) Survival Secrets for Atomic Attacks
ALWAYS PUT FIRST THINGS FIRST
Try to Get Shielded
MF you have time, get down in a basement or subway. Should you unexpectedly be caught ouGof-doors, seek shelter alongside a building, or jump in any handy ditch or gutter.
Drop Flat on Ground or floor
Ta keep from being tossed about and to lessen the chances of being struck by falling and hying objects, flatten out at the base of a wall, ar at the bottom of a bank.
Bury Your Face in Your Arms
When you drop flat, hide your eyes in the crook of your elbow. That will protect your face from flash bums, prevent temporary blindness and keep flying objects out of your eyes.
NEVER LOSE YOUR HEAD
THE COLD WAR
• 739 Strategic Services and would be responsible for collecting information through both open and covert methods; as the Cold War continued, the CIA would also engage secretly in political and military operations. The National Security Act, in other words, gave the president expanded powers with which to pursue the nation’s international goals.
The Road to NATO
At about the same time, the United States was moving to strengthen the military capabilities of Western Europe.
Convinced that a reconstructed Germany was essential to the hopes of the West, Truman reached an agreement with England and France to merge the three western zones of occupation into a new West German republic (which would include the former American, British, and French sectors of Berlin, even though that city lay well within the East German zone). Stalin responded quickly. On June 24, 1948, he imposed a tight blockade around the western sectors of Berlin. If Germany was to be officially divided, he was implying, then the country's western government would have to abandon its outpost in the heart of the Soviet-controlled eastern zone. Truman refused to do so.
Reykjavik ^ICELAND

j-'
Faeroe Is. w
(Den.) h
ATLANTIC
OCLAN
Shetland Is. .
(Br.) ?

North
IRELAND ^EAT N BRITAIN
. /	Amsterdam
zLondon	c “'7
" .^ETH. Brussels ®
DENjMARK^. „ J C' : .^Copenhagen

SWEDEN ’
FINLAND
f^RWAY	He|sjnki
^Oslo| Stockholm1*
Moscow ®
Berlin EAST
Warsaw
SOVIET UNION
/
Lisbon*
A.
® Madrid
SPAIN
MOROCCO
BELG.
B°nn GERMANY POLAND Paris® LUX. FRANCE
WEST
Prague GERMANY C^CH.
Vienna*
SWITZ/ AUSTRIA *
Budapest HUNGA“ ROMANIA
1O1
Corsica; (Fr.) h
Sardinia } dt.)F :
ITALY \ Rome
Sicily
ALGERIA (Fr.)
< Belgrade	Bucharest & ;
> ^0q	*
A ^l//4	«Sofia
Tirane®	’
ALBANIA	'"
' GREECE
j, j
:	^Athens
J A
Finck Sen
® Ankara
TURKEY
SYRIA
hi
■ Malta (Br.)


IRAN
NATO countries, 1956
Warsaw Pact countries, 1956 Unaffiliated countries
TUNISIA
' ( c
Crete"
' n n S c a
Cyprus r - -(Br.)
LEBANON"
ISRAEL
JORDAN
IRAQ
KUWAIT
LIBYA
Suez'
Canal
EGYPT
SAUDI ARABIA
toed EUROPE AFTER WORLD WAR II This map shows the sharp division that emerged in Europe after World War II between the area under the control of the Soviet Union and the , a,lied with the Uni,ed State, In the east, Soviet control or i"-^
^“divitIXrZXXLupying power/a, the end of the war. Eventually, the American, British, and French sectors were combined to create West Be.a city
-rned by West Germany but entirely surrounded by communist East Germany.
ow did the West prevent East Germany from absorbing West Berlin?
740 < CHAPTER 27
Unwilling to risk war through a military challenge to the blockade, he ordered a massive airlift to supply the city with food, fuel, and other needed goods. The airlift continued for more than ten months, transporting nearly 2.5 million tons of material, keeping a city of 2 million people alive, and transforming West Berlin into a symbol of the West’s resolve to resist communist expansion. In the spring of 1949, Stalin lifted the now-ineffective blockade. And in October, the division of Germany into two nations-the Federal Republic in the west and the Democratic Republic in the east-became official.
The crisis in Berlin accelerated the consolidation of what was already in effect an alliance among the United States and
NATO	the countries °f Western Europe. On
April 4, 1949, twelve nations signed an agreement establishing the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and declaring that an armed attack against one member would be considered an attack against all. The NATO countries would, moreover, maintain a standing military force in Europe to defend against what many policymakers believed was the threat of a Soviet invasion. The formation of NATO eventually spurred the Soviet Union to create an alliance of its own with the communist governments in Eastern Europe-an
alliance formalized in 1955 by the Warsaw Pact.
Reevaluating Cold War Policy
A series of events in 1949 propelled the Cold War in new directions. An announcement in September that the Soviet Union had successfully exploded its first atomic weapon, years earlier than predicted, shocked and frightened many Americans. So did the collapse of Chiang Kai-shek’s nationalist government in China, which occurred with startling speed in the last months of 1949. Chiang fled with his political allies and the remnants of his army to the offshore island of Formosa (Taiwan), and the entire Chinese mainland came under the control of a communist government that many Americans believed to be an extension of the Soviet Union. The United States refused to recognize the new communist regime and, instead, devoted increased attention to the revitalization of Japan as a buffer against Asian communism, ending the American occupation in 1952.
In this atmosphere of escalating crisis, Truman called for a thorough review of American foreign policy. The result was a NSC 68 National Security Council report, issued in 1950 and commonly known as NSC-68, which outlined a shift in the American position. The first statements of the containment doctrine-the writings of George Kennan, the Truman Doctrine speech-had made at least some distinctions between areas of vital interest to the United States and areas of less importance to the nation’s foreign policy and called on America to share the burden of containment with its allies. But the April 1950 document argued that the United States could no longer rely on other nations to take the initiative in resisting communism. It must itself establish firm and active leadership of the noncommunist world. And it must move to stop communist expansion virtually anywhere it occurred,
PROCLAIMING THE VICTORY OF THE REVOLUTION
Chairman Mao Zedong, standing on the rostrum of the Tiananmen Square Gate in Beijing, speaks by radio to the Chinese people on October 1, 1949, to proclaim the founding of the People s Republic of China. This was shortly after the communist victory in the nation s civil war and the departure of Chiang Kai-shek and his followers to the island of Taiwan. (© AP Images) regardless of the intrinsic strategic or economic value of the lands in question. Among other things, the report called for a major expansion of American military power, with a defense budget almost four times the previously projected figure.
The Conservative Opposition
to Containment
The containment doctrine for dealing with the Cold War attracted broad bipartisan support. But not everyone believed that containment was the right approach to take. Some Americans on the left believed that containment was unnecessarily belligerent and that the United States could have made peace with the Russians. But greater opposition to containment came from conservative Americans who believed that it was too weak a response to communism and saw containment as a kind of appeasement.
Among the conservatives who disdained containment was an anticommunist organization known as the John Birch
THE COLD WAR * 741
Society. Its leader was Robert Welch, a man so fearful of communism that he believed some of the most important leaders of American government were trying to undermine the United States by collaborating with the Soviets. Welch presented his opposition in The Blue Book of the John Birch Society, in which he argued that much of the American government was riddled with treason. "For years,” he wrote, we have been taken steadily down the road to Communism by steps supposedly designed ... as ways of fighting communism.” But instead, he argued, it was communist Americans themselves who were undermining the nation. "Both the U.S. and Soviet governments are controlled by the same furtive conspiratorial cabal of internationalists, greedy bankers, and corrupt politicians,” Welch wrote. "If left unexposed, the traitors inside the U.S. government would betray the country’s sovereignty to the United Nations for a collectivist New World Order, managed by a 'one-world government.’” Among the sources of treason, Welch claimed, were the United Nations and other international institutions. Many Americans considered the John Birch Society an extremist organization, but the belief that communism was the greatest danger facing the United States was widely supported by many people.
The opposition to containment reached some of the highest levels of the government. John Foster Dulles, who would become secretary of state in the Eisenhower administration, wrote the foreign policy plank of the Republican platform in 1952. "We charge that the leaders of the Administration in power lost the peace so dearly earned by World War II,” Dulles stated. "They abandoned friendly nations such as Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, Poland, and Czechoslovakia.” Containment, opponents such as Dulles argued, was a policy of weakness that had allowed the communists to take over much of the world. Many of those who argued against containment called for what was known as "rollback”: instead of containing communism, the United States should be pushing back the borders of communism, despite the possibility of another war. President Eisenhower, however, did not share Dulles’s belief in rollback, and the government abided by the containment strategy throughout the 1950s and beyond.
AMERICAN SOCIETY AND
POLITICS AFTER THE WAR
The crises overseas were not the only frustrations the American people encountered after the war. The nation also faced serious economic difficulties in adapting to peacetime. The resulting instability contributed to an increasingly heated political climate.
The Problems of Reconversion
The bombs that destroyed Hiroshima and Nagasaki ended the
war months earlier than almost anyone had predicted and pro-
pelled the nation precipitously into a process of reconversion.
There had been many predictions that peace would bring a
return of Depression unemployment, as war production ceased
and returning soldiers flooded the labor market. But there was no general economic collapse in 1946-for several reasons. Government spending dropped sharply and abruptly, to be sure; $35 billion of war contracts were canceled within weeks of the Japanese surrender. But increased consumer demand
GI
Bill soon comPensatecT Consumer goods had been generally unavailable during the war, so many workers had saved a substantial portion of their wages and were now ready to spend. A $6 billion tax cut pumped additional money into general circulation. The Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944, better known as the GI Bill of Rights, provided economic and educational assistance to veter- ans, increasing spending even further.
This flood of consumer demand ensured that there would
be no new depression, but it contributed to more than two years of serious inflation, during which prices rose at rates of 14 to 15 percent annually. In the summer of 1946, President Truman vetoed an extension of the authority of the wartime Office of Price Administration, thus eliminating price controls. (He was opposed not to the controls, but to congressional amendments that had weakened the OPA.) Inflation soared to 25 percent before he relented a month later and signed a bill little different from the one he had rejected.
Compounding the economic difficulties was a sharp rise in labor unrest, driven in part by the impact of inflation. By the end of 1945, there had already been major strikes in the auto-
Postwar mobile, electrical, and steel industries. In Labor Unrest April 1946, John L. Lewis led the United Mine Workers on strike, shutting down the coal fields for forty days. Fears grew rapidly that without vital coal supplies, the entire economy might grind to a halt. Truman finally forced the miners to return to work by ordering
THE GI BILL
The Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944, better known as the GI Bill provided a wide range of benefits to all honorably discharged service personnel who served during the war. Benefits included low-cost mortgages, low-interest loans to start a business, cash payments of tuition and living expenses to attend university, high school or vocational education, as well as one year of unemployment compensation. By 1956, roughly 2.2 million veterans had used the G.l. Bill education benefits to attend colleges or universities. An additional 5.6 million veterans used these benefits for some kind of training program. (© Bettmann/Corbis) 742 CHAPTER 27
THE COLD WAR
» 743 government seizure of the mines. But in the process, he pressured mine owners to grant the union most of its demands, which he had earlier denounced as inflationary. Almost simultaneously, the nation’s railroads suffered a total shutdown-the first in the nation’s history-as two major unions walked out on strike. By threatening to use the army to run the trains, Truman pressured the workers back to work after only a few days.
Reconversion was particularly difficult for the millions of women and minorities who had entered the workforce during the war. With veterans returning home and looking for jobs in the industrial economy, employers tended to push women, blacks, Hispanics, Chinese, and others out of the plants to make room for white males. Some of the war workers, particularly women, left the workforce voluntarily, out of a desire to return to their former domestic lives. But as many as 80 percent of women workers, and virtually all black, Hispanic, and Asian males, wanted to continue working. The postwar inflation, the pressure to meet the rising expectations of a high-consumption society, the growing divorce rate, which left many women responsible for their own economic well-being-all combined to create among women a high demand for paid employment. As they found themselves excluded from industrial jobs, therefore, women workers moved increasingly into other areas of the economy (above all, the service sector).
The Fair Deal Rejected
Days after the Japanese surrender, Truman submitted to Congress a twenty-one-point domestic program outlining what
Truman's	^ater terme<^ "Fair Deal.” It called for
"Fair Deal" expansion of Social Security benefits, the raising of the legal minimum wage from 40 to 65 cents an hour, a program to ensure full employment through aggressive use of federal spending and investment, a permanent Fair Employment Practices Act, public housing and slum clearance, long-range environmental and public works planning, and government promotion of scientific research. Weeks later he added other proposals: federal aid to funding for the St. Lawrence Seaway, nationalization of atomic energy, and, perhaps most important, national health insurance-a dream of welfare-state liberals for decades, but one deferred in 1935 when the Social Security Act was written. The president was declaring an end to the wartime moratorium on liberal reform. He was also symbolizing, as he later wrote, "my assumption of
the office of President in my own right.”
But many of the Fair Deal programs fell victim to the same public and congressional conservatism that had crippled the last years of the New Deal. Indeed, that conservatism seemed to be intensifying, as the November 1946 congressional elections suggested. Using the simple but devastating slogan "Had Enough?,” the Republican Party won control of both houses of Congress.
The new Republican Congress quickly moved to reduce
government spending and chip away at New Deal reforms. The
president bowed to what he claimed was the popular mandate
to lift most remaining wage and price controls, and Congress
Taft-Hartley
Act
moved further to deregulate the economy. Inflation rapidly increased. When a public outcry arose over the soaring prices for meat, Senator Robert Taft, perhaps the most influential Republican conservative in Congress, advised consumers to "eat less,” and added, "We have got to break with the corrupting idea that we can legislate prosperity, legislate equality, legislate opportunity.” True to the spirit of Taft’s words, the Republican Congress refused to appropriate funds to aid education, increase Social Security, or support reclamation and power projects in the West. It defeated a proposal to raise the minimum wage. It passed tax measures that cut rates dramatically for high-income families and moderately for those with lower incomes. Only vetoes by the president finally forced a more progressive bill.
The most notable action of the new Congress was its assault on the Wagner Act of 1935. Conservatives had always resented the new powers the legislation had granted unions; and in light of the labor difficulties during and after the war, such resentments
intensified sharply. The result was the Labor-Management Relations Act of 1947, better known as the Taft-Hartley Act. It made illegal the so-called closed shop (a workplace in which no one can be hired without first being a member of a union). And although it continued to permit the creation of so-called union shops (in which workers must join a union after being hired), it permitted states to pass "right-to-work” laws prohibiting even that. Repealing this provision, the controversial Section 14(b), would remain a goal of the labor movement for decades. Outraged workers and union leaders denounced the measure as a "slave labor bill.” Truman vetoed it, but both the House and the Senate easily overruled him the same day.
The Taft-Hartley Act did not destroy the labor movement, as many union leaders had predicted. But it did damage weaker unions in relatively lightly organized industries such as chemicals and textiles; and it made more difficult the organizing of workers who had never been union members, especially women, minorities, and most workers in the South.
The Election of 1948
Truman and his advisers believed the American public was not ready to abandon the achievements of the New Deal, despite the 1946 election results. As they planned strategy for the 1948 campaign, therefore, they placed their hopes in an appeal to enduring Democratic loyalties. Throughout 1948, Truman proposed one reform measure after another. Although Congress ignored or defeated them all, the president was building campaign issues for the fall.
There remained, however, the problems of Truman’s personal unpopularity- the belief among much of the electorate Democratic t^iat an<^ his administration were weak Defections and inept-and the deep divisions within the Democratic Party. At the Democratic
National Convention that summer, two factions abandoned the party: southern conservatives reacted angrily to Truman’s proposed civil rights bill (the first major one of the century)
and to the approval at the convention of a civil rights plank in the platform (engineered by Hubert Humphrey, the mayor of Minneapolis). These two factions formed the States’ Rights (or "Dixiecrat”) Party, with Governor Strom Thurmond of South Carolina as its presidential nominee. At the same time, the Democratic Party’s left wing formed a new Progressive Party, with Henry A. Wallace as its candidate. Wallace supporters objected to what they considered the slow and ineffective domestic policies of the Truman administration, but they resented even more the president’s confrontational stance toward the Soviet Union.
In addition, many Democratic liberals unwilling to leave the party attempted to dump the president in 1948. The Americans for Democratic Action (ADA), a coalition of liberals, tried to entice Dwight D. Eisenhower, the popular war hero, to contest the nomination. Only after Eisenhower had refused did liberals bow to the inevitable and concede the nomination to Truman. The Republicans, in the meantime, had once again nominated Governor Thomas E. Dewey of New York, whose substantial reelection victory in 1946 had made him one of the nation’s leading political figures. Austere, dignified, and competent, he seemed to offer an unbeatable alternative to the president. Polls showed Dewey with an apparently insurmountable lead in September, so much so that some opinion analysts stopped taking surveys. Dewey conducted a subdued, statesmanlike campaign and tried to avoid antagonizing anyone. But Truman, seemingly done, believed he could win. As the campaign gathered momentum, Truman became more and more aggressive, turning the fire away from himself and toward Dewey and the "do-nothing, good-for-nothing” Republican Congress,
ELECTION NIGHT, 1948
Throughout the 1948 campaign, Harry Truman was considered a very unlikely victor for a new term as president. But the combination of an energetic campaign by Truman, a lack of enthusiasm for his opponent, Thomas Dewey, and the lingering loyalty to the New Deal led to a surprise victory. The Chicago Daily Tribune, a strongly Republican paper, was so certain of Dewey's victory that it published this headline, which hit the newsstands just after it became clear that Truman won. This picture is one of the most famous political photographs of the twentieth century. (© Rue des Archives/The Granger Collection, New York) which was, he told the voters, responsible for fueling inflation and abandoning workers and the middle class. To dramatize his point, he called Congress into a special session in July to give it a chance, he said, to enact the liberal measures the Republicans had recently written into their platform. Congress met for two weeks and, predictably, did almost nothing.
The president traveled nearly 32,000 miles and made 356 speeches, delivering blunt, extemporaneous attacks. He had told Senator Alben Barkley of Kentucky, his running mate, "I’m going to fight hard. I’m going to give them hell.” He called for repeal of the Taft-Hartley Act, increased price supports for farmers, and strong civil rights protection for blacks. (He was the first president to campaign in Harlem.) He sought, in short, to re-create much of Franklin Roosevelt’s
New Deal coalition. To the surprise of virtually everyone, he succeeded. On election night, Truman won a narrow but decisive victory: 49.5 percent of the popular vote to Dewey’s 45.1 percent (with the two splinter parties dividing the small remainder between them), and an electoral vote margin of 303 to 189. Democrats, in the meantime, regained both houses of Congress by substantial margins.
Truman’s
Surprising
Victory
The Fair Deal Revived
Despite the Democratic victories, the Eighty-First Congress was little more hospitable to Truman’s Fair Deal reform than its Republican predecessor. Truman did win some important victories. Congress raised the legal minimum wage from 40 cents to 75 cents an hour. It approved an important expansion
744 . CHAPTER 27
Electoral Vote
303
189
39
segregation within the armed forces. And he allowed the Justice Department to become actively involved in court battles against discriminatory statutes. In the meantime, the Supreme Court signaled its own growing awareness of the issue by ruling, in Shelley v. Kraemer (1948), that the courts could not be used to enforce private “covenants” meant to bar African Americans from residential neighborhoods.
The Nuclear Age
Candidate (Party)
Harry S. Truman (Democratic)
Thomas E. Dewey (Republican)
Strom Thurmond (States' Rights) Henry A. Wallace (Progressive)
Other Candidates (Prohibition; Socialist Labor, Socialist, Socialist Workers)
Popular Vote (%)
24,105,695
(49.5)
21,969,170
(45.1)
1,169,021
(2.4)
1,156,103
(2.4)
272,713
Conflicting Views of Nuclear Power
53% of electorate voting
ELECTION OF 1948
Despite the widespread expectation that the Republican candidate, Thomas Dewey, would easily defeat Truman in 1948, the president in fact won a substantial reelection victory that year. This map shows the broad geographic reach of Truman's victory. Dewey swept most of the Northeast, but Truman dominated almost everywhere else. Strom Thurmond, the States’ Rights candidate, carried four states in the South. • What had prompted Thurmond to desert the Democratic Party and run for president on his own?
of the Social Security system, increasing benefits by 75 percent and extending them to 10 million additional people. And it passed the National Housing Act of 1949, which provided for the construction of 810,000 units of low-income housing, accompanied by long-term rent subsidies. (Inadequate funding plagued the program for years, and it reached its initial goal only in 1972.)
But on other issues-among them national health insurance and aid to education-Truman made no progress. Nor was he
able to persuade Congress to accept the
Truman	_
Stymied C1V1 ri§hts legislation he proposed in 1949, which would have made lynching a federal crime, provided federal protection of black voting rights, abolished the poll tax, and established a new Fair Employment Practices Commission to curb discrimination in hiring (to replace the wartime commission Roosevelt had established in
1941). Southern Democrats filibustered to kill the bill.
Truman did proceed on his own to battle several forms of
racial discrimination. He ordered an end to discrimination in
the hiring of government employees. He began to dismantle
Looming over the political, economic, and diplomatic struggles of the postwar years was the image of the great and terrible mushroom clouds that had risen over Alamogordo, Hiroshima, and Nagasaki. Americans greeted these terrible new instruments of destruction with fear and awe, but also with expectation. Postwar culture, therefore, was torn in many ways. There was the dark image of the nuclear war that many Americans feared would be
a result of the rivalry with the Soviet Union. But there was also the bright image of a dazzling technological future that atomic power might help to produce.
The fear of nuclear weapons was not hard to find in popular culture, even if it was often disguised in other ways. The late 1940s and early 1950s were the heyday of the film noir, a kind of filmmaking that had originated in France and had been named for the dark lighting characteristic of the genre. American film noir movies portrayed the loneliness of individuals in an impersonal world-a staple of American culture for many decades-but also suggested the menacing character of the age, the looming possibility of vast destruction. Sometimes, films and television programs addressed nuclear fear explicitly for example, the celebrated television show of the 1950s and early 1960s The Twilight Zone, which frequently featured dramatic portrayals of the aftermath of nuclear war; or postwar comic books, which depicted powerful superheroes saving the world from destruction.
Such images resonated with the public because awareness of nuclear weapons was increasingly built into their daily lives. Schools and office buildings had regular air raid drills, to prepare people for the possibility of nuclear attack. Radio stations regularly tested the emergency broadcast systems. Fallout shelters sprang up in public buildings and private homes, stocked with water and canned goods. America was a nation filled with anxiety.
And yet at the same time, the United States was also an exuberant nation, dazzled by its own prosperity and excited by the technological innovations that were transforming the Promise of world. Among those innovations was nuclear power-which offered the possibility that the same scientific knowledge that could destroy the world might also lead it into a dazzling future. A Gallup poll late in
1948 revealed that approximately two-thirds of those who had an opinion on the subject believed that, "in the long run,” atomic energy would "do more good than harm.” Nuclear power
Cheap
Nuclear
Power
THE COLD WAR
• 745 plants began to spring up in many areas of the country, welcomed as the source of cheap and unlimited electricity their potential dangers scarcely even discussed by those who celebrated the creation of atomic power.
THE KOREAN WAR
On June 24, 1950, the armies of communist North Korea swept across their southern border and invaded the pro-Western half of the Korean peninsula to the south. Within days, they had occupied much of South Korea, including Seoul, its capital. Almost immediately, the United States committed itself to defeating the North Korean offensive. It was the nation’s first military engagement of the Cold War.
The Divided Peninsula
Before the end of World War II, both the United States and the Soviet Union had sent troops into Korea in an effort to weaken Japanese occupation. Once the war was over and the Japanese expelled, the United States and the Soviet Union each supported different governments-the Soviets supporting a communist regime in the North and the United States supporting a pro-c	Western government in the South. Instead, they
Rhee had divided the nation, supposedly temporarily, along the 38th parallel. The Russians departed in
1949, leaving behind a communist government in the north with a strong, Soviet-equipped army. The Americans left a few months later, handing control to the pro-Western government of Syngman Rhee, who was anticommunist but only nominally democratic. He had a relatively small military, which he used primarily to suppress internal opposition.
The relative weakness of the south offered a strong incentive to nationalists in the North Korean government who wanted to reunite the country. The temptation to invade grew stronger when the American government implied that it did not consider South Korea within its own "defense perimeter.” The role of the Soviet Union in North Korea’s calculations prior to the 1950 invasion remains unclear; there is reason to believe that the North Koreans acted without Stalin’s prior approval. But the Soviets supported the offensive once it began.
The Truman administration responded quickly to the invasion. On June 27, 1950, the president appealed to the United Nations to intervene. The Soviet Union was boycotting the Security Council at the time (to protest the council’s refusal to recognize the new communist government of China) and thus was unable to exercise its veto power. As a result, American delegates were able to win UN agreement to a resolution calling for international assistance to the Rhee government. On June 30, the United States ordered its own ground forces into Korea, and Truman appointed General Douglas MacArthur to command the overwhelmingly American UN operations there.
The intervention in Korea was the first expression of the
newly expansive American foreign policy outlined in NSC-68.
But the administration quickly went beyond NSC-68 and decided that the war would be an effort not simply at containment but also at "liberation.” After a surprise American invasion at Inchon in September had routed the North Korean
"Liberation” forces from the south and sent them fleeing back across the 38th parallel, Truman gave MacArthur permission to pursue the communists into their own territory. His aim, as an American-sponsored UN resolution proclaimed in October, was to create "a unified,
independent and democratic Korea.”
From Invasion to Stalemate
For several weeks, MacArthur’s invasion of North Korea proceeded smoothly. On October 19, the capital, Pyongyang, fell to the UN forces. Victory seemed near-until the new communist government of China, alarmed by the movement of American forces toward its border, intervened. By November 4, eight divisions of the Chinese army had entered the war. The UN offensive stalled and then collapsed. Through December 1950, outnumbered American forces fought a bitter, losing battle against the Chinese divisions, retreating at almost every juncture. Within weeks, communist forces had pushed the Americans back below the 38th parallel once again and had captured the South Korean capital of Seoul a second time. By mid-January 1951 the rout had ceased; and by March the UN armies had managed to regain much of the territory they had recently lost, taking back Seoul and pushing the communists north of the 38th parallel once more. But with that, the war degenerated into a protracted stalemate.
From the start, Truman was determined to avoid a direct conflict with China, which he feared might lead to a new world war. Once China entered the war, he began seeking a negotiated solution to the struggle, and for the next two years he insisted that there be no wider war. But he faced a formidable opponent in General MacArthur, who resisted any limits on his military discretion. The United States was fighting the Chinese, he argued. It should therefore attack China itself, if not through an actual invasion, then at least by bombing communist forces massing north of the Chinese border. In March 1951, MacArthur indicated his unhappiness in a public letter to House Republican leader Joseph W. Martin that concluded: "There is no substitute for victory.” His position had wide popular support.
The Martin letter came after nine months during which MacArthur had opposed Truman’s decisions. More than once, the president had warned the general to keep his objections to himself. The release of the Martin letter, therefore, struck the president as
intolerable insubordination. On April 11, 1951, he relieved MacArthur of his command.
There was a storm of public outrage. Sixty-nine percent of the American people supported MacArthur, a Gallup poll reported. When the general returned to the United States
Truman-
MacArthur
Controversy
746 • CHAPTER 27
DISARRAY IN KOREA
This disturbing picture by the noted Life magazine photographer Carl Mydans conveys something of the air of catastrophe that surrounded the rout of Americans from North Korea by the Chinese in 1951. Having approached the Chinese border, the Americans confronted a massive invasion of Korea by Chinese troops, who soon pushed them back below the border between the North and the South and well beyond. Shown here are U.S. Marines following a vehicle carrying corpses after a battle with Chinese and North Korean troops. They had been trapped by the enemy in North Korea and had fought their way forty miles south before being rescued. (Photo by Carl Mydans/© Time & Life Pictures/Getty images) later in 1951, he was greeted with wild enthusiasm. His televised farewell appearance before a joint session of Congress-which he concluded by saying, "Old soldiers never die, they just fade away'-attracted an audience of millions. Public criticism of Truman abated somewhat when a number of prominent military figures, including General Omar Bradley, publicly supported the president’s decision. But substantial hostility toward Truman remained. In the meantime, the Korean stalemate continued. Negotiations between the opposing forces began at Panmunjom in July 1951, but the talks-and the war-dragged on until 1953.
Limited Mobilization
Just as the war in Korea produced only a limited American military commitment abroad, so it created only a limited economic mobilization at home. Still, the government did try to control the wartime economy in several important ways.
First, Truman set up the Office of Defense Mobilization to
fight inflation by holding down prices and discouraging high

union wage uemanas. vvnen tnese cautious regulatory < failed, the president took more-drastic action. When railroad workers walked off the job in 1951, Truman ordered the government to seize control of the railroads. That helped keep the Wartime trains running, but it had no effect on union Economic demands. Workers ultimately got most of Regulation what they had demanded. In 1952, during a nationwide steel strike, Truman seized the steel mills, citing his powers as commander in chief. But in a
6-to-3 decision, the Supreme Court ruled that the president had exceeded his authority, and Truman was forced to relent.
The Korean War gave a significant boost to economic growth by pumping new government funds into the economy at a point when many people believed a recession was about to begin. But as the long stalemate continued, leaving 140,000 Americans dead or wounded, frustration turned to anger.
Many began to believe that something must be deeply wrong-not only in Korea but within the United States as well. Such fears contributed to the rise of the second major campaign of the century against domestic communism.
THE COLD WAR * 747
North Korean forces,
June 25,1950-Sept. 10,1950 UN counterattack Sept. 15,1950-Nov. 24,1950 same*
Pusan
THE KOREAN WAR, 1950-1953
These two maps illustrate the changing fortunes of UN forces (which were mostly American) during the 1950-1953 Korean War. The map at the left shows the extent of the North Korean invasion of the South in 1950; communist forces for a time controlled all of Korea except a small area around Pusan in the southeast. On September 15, 1950, UN troops under Douglas MacArthur landed in force at Inchon and soon drove the North Koreans back across the border. MacArthur then pursued the North Koreans well into their own territory. The map at right shows the very different circumstances once the Chinese entered the war in November 1950. Chinese forces drove the UN army back below the 38th parallel and, briefly, deep into South Korea, below Seoul. The UN troops fought back to the prewar border between North and South Korea late in 1951, but the war then bogged down into a stalemate that continued for a year and a half.
Ye lion Sea

* What impact did the Korean War have on American politics in the early 1950s?
the crusade against
SUBVERSION
Why did the American people develop a growing fear of internal communist subversion that by the early 1950s had reached the point of near hysteria? There are many possible answers, but no single definitive explanation.
One factor was obvious. Communism was not an imagined enemy in the 1950s. It had tangible shape, in Joseph Stalin and the Soviet Union. In addition, America had
Sources of encountered setbacks in its battle against THE Red Scare communjsm: the Korean stalemate, the "loss”
of China, the Soviet development of an atomic bomb. Searching for someone to blame, many people were attracted to the idea of a communist conspiracy within American borders. But there were other factors as well, rooted in American domestic politics.
1UAC and Alger Hiss
Auch of the anticommunist furor emerged out of the Republican Party’s search for an issue with which to attack he Democrats, and out of the Democrats’ efforts to stifle hat issue. Beginning in 1947 (with Republicans temporar-ly in control of Congress), the House Un-American Activities
748 • CHAPTER 27
DALTON TRUMBO
Screenwriter Dalton Trumbo was a member of the "Hollywood Ten.” He refused to testify before the House Un-American Activities Committee in its investigation of communist influences in Hollywood. As a result, Trumbo was blacklisted and could not find work. While blacklisted, Trumbo won two Academy Awards; one was given to a "front" writer who pretended to be the author of the script and the other was awarded to "Robert Rich,” Trumbo's pseudonym. {© Bettmann/Corbis)
Committee (HUAC) held widely publicized investigations to prove that, under Democratic rule, the government had tolerated (if not actually encouraged) communist subversion. The committee turned first to the movie industry, arguing that communists had infiltrated Hollywood. Writers and producers, some of them former communists, were called to testify; and when several of them ("the Hollywood Ten”) refused to answer questions about their own political beliefs and those of their colleagues, they were jailed for contempt. Some writers were barred from employment in the movie industry when Hollywood, attempting to protect its public image, adopted a blacklist of those of "suspicious loyalty.”
More alarming to much of the public was HUAC’s investigation into charges of disloyalty leveled against a former high-ranking member of the State Department: Alger Hiss. In 1948, Whittaker Chambers, a self-avowed former communist agent who had turned vehemently against the party and become an editor at Time magazine, told the committee that Alger Hiss Hiss Passe<^ classified State Department documents through him to the Soviet
Union in 1937 and 1938. When Hiss sued him for slander, Chambers produced microfilms of the documents (called the "pumpkin papers,” because Chambers had kept them hidden in a pumpkin in his garden). Hiss could not be tried for espionage because of the statute of limitations (a law that protects individuals from prosecution for most crimes after seven years have passed). But largely because of the relentless efforts of Richard M. Nixon, a freshman Republican congressman from California and a member of HUAC, Hiss was convicted of perjury and served several years in prison. The Hiss case not only discredited a prominent young diplomat; it also cast suspicion on a generation of liberal Democrats and made it possible
for many Americans to believe that communists had actually infiltrated the government.
The Federal Loyalty Program and the Rosenberg Case

rartiy to protect itseir against Republican encourage support for the president’s foreign policy initiatives, the Truman administration in 1947 initiated a widely publicized program to review the loyalty of federal employees. In August 1950, the president authorized sensitive agencies to fire people deemed "bad security risks.” By 1951, more than 2,000 government employees had resigned under pressure and 212 had been dismissed.
The employee loyalty program established a widely cited list of supposedly subversive organizations. The director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), J. Edgar Hoover, investigated and harassed alleged radicals. In 1950, Congress passed the McCarran Internal Security Act, requiring all communist organizations to register
with the government. Truman vetoed the bill. Congress easily overrode his veto.
The successful Soviet detonation of a nuclear weapon in 1949 convinced many people that there had been a conspiracy to pass American atomic secrets to the Russians. In 1950, Klaus Fuchs, a young British scientist, seemed to confirm those fears when he testified that he had delivered to the Russians details of the manufacture of the bomb. The case ultimately settled on an obscure New York couple, Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, members of the Communist Party, whom the federal government claimed had been the masterminds of
The
McCarran Internal Security Act
THE COLD WAR
• 749 the conspiracy. The case against them rested in large part on testimony by Ethel’s brother, David Greenglass, a machinist who had worked on the Manhattan Project. Greenglass admitted to channeling secret information to the Soviet Union through other agents (including Fuchs). His sister and brother-in-law had, he claimed, planned and orchestrated the espionage. The Rosenbergs were convicted and, on April 5, 1951, sentenced to death. After two years of appeals and protests by sympathizers, they died in the electric chair on June 19, 1953.
AU these factors-the HUAC investigations, the Hiss trial, the loyalty investigations, the McCarran Act, the Rosenberg case-helped to intensify public fear of communist subversion. By the early 1950s, the fear seemed to have gripped much of the country. State and local governments, the judiciary, schools and universities, labor unions-all sought to purge themselves
Anticommunist of real or ima§ined subversives. A perva-
Hysteria sive ^ear settled on the country-not only the fear of communist infiltration but also the fear of being suspected of communist subversion. It was a climate that made possible the rise of an extraordinary public figure, whose behavior at any other time might have been
dismissed as preposterous.
McCarthyism
McCarthyism’s
Appeal
Joseph McCarthy was a relatively undistinguished first-term Republican senator from Wisconsin when, in February 1950, he suddenly burst into national prominence. In the midst of a speech in Wheeling, West Virginia, he raised a sheet of paper and claimed to "hold in my hand” a list of 205 known communists currently working in the U.S. State Department. No person of comparable stature had ever made so bold a charge against the federal government; and in the weeks to come, as McCarthy repeated and expanded his accusations, he emerged as the nation’s most prominent leader of the crusade against domestic subversion.
Within weeks of his charges against the State Department, McCarthy was leveling accusations at other agencies. After 1952, with the Republicans in control of the Senate and McCarthy the chairman of a special subcommittee, he conducted highly publicized investigations of subversion in many areas of the government. His ambitious assistants, Roy Cohn and David Schine, sauntered arrogantly through federal offices and American embassies overseas looking for
evidence of communist influence. One hapless government official after another appeared before McCarthy’s subcommittee, where the senator belligerently and often cruelly badgered witnesses and destroyed public careers. McCarthy never produced solid evidence of actual communist subversion. But a growing constituency adored him nevertheless for his coarse, "fearless” assaults on a government establishment that many Americans considered arrogant, elitist, even traitorous. Republicans, in particular, rallied to his claims that
the Democrats had been responsible for "twenty years of treason,” that only a change of parties could rid the country of subversion. McCarthy, in short, provided his followers with an issue into which they could channel a wide range of resentments: fear of communism, animosity toward the country’s "eastern establishment,” and frustrated partisan ambitions.
For a time, McCarthy intimidated all but a few people from opposing him. Even the highly popular Dwight D. Eisenhower, running for president in 1952, did not speak out against him, although he disliked McCarthy’s tactics and was outraged at McCarthy’s attacks on General George Marshall.
The Republican Revival
Public frustration over the stalemate in Korea and popular fears of internal subversion combined to make 1952 a bad year for the Democratic Party. Truman, whose popularity had greatly diminished, wisely decided not to run again. The party united instead behind Governor Adlai E. Stevenson of Illinois, whose dignity, wit, and eloquence made him a beloved figure to many liberals and intellectuals. But Republicans charged that Stevenson lacked the strength or the will to combat communism sufficiently. McCarthy described him as "soft” and took delight in deliberately confusing him with Alger Hiss.
Stevenson’s greatest problem, however, was the Republican candidate opposing him. Rejecting the efforts of conservatives to nominate Robert Taft or Douglas MacArthur, the Republicans turned to a man who had no previous identifi-Dwight cation with the party: General Dwight
Eisenhower D- Eisenhower, military hero, commander of NATO, president of Columbia University in New York. Eisenhower won nomination on the first ballot. He chose as his running mate the young California senator who had gained national prominence through his crusade against Alger Hiss: Richard M. Nixon. Eisenhower and Nixon were a powerful combination in the autumn campaign. While Eisenhower attracted support through his geniality and his statesmanlike pledges to settle the Korean conflict (at one point dramatically promising to "go to Korea” himself), Nixon effectively exploited the issue of communist subversion. After surviving early accusations of financial improprieties (which he effectively neutralized in a famous television address, the "Checkers speech”), Nixon went on to launch harsh attacks on Democratic "cowardice,” "appeasement,” and
"treason.”
Eisenhower won by both a popular and electoral landslide: 55 percent of the popular vote to Stevenson’s 44 percent, 442 electoral votes to Stevenson’s 89. Republicans gained control of both houses of Congress for only the second time in two decades. The election of 1952 ended twenty years of Democratic government. And while it might not have seemed so at the time, it also signaled the end of some of the worst turbulence of the postwar era.
"McCarthyism"
tit y y irj bt the American Civil Liberties Union warned in the early 1950s, at the peak of VV il Jut IN the anticommunist fervor that is now known as "McCarthyism," that "the threat to civil liberties today is the most serious in the history of our country," it was expressing a view with which many Americans wholeheartedly agreed. But while many Americans accept that there were unusually powerful challenges to freedom of speech and association in the late 1940s and early 1950s, there is wide disagreement about the causes and meaning of those challenges.
The simplest argument—and one that continues to attract scholarly support—is that the postwar Red Scare expressed real and legitimate concerns about communist subversion in the United States. William O'Neill, in A Better World (1982), and Richard Gid Powers, in Not Without Honor (1995), have both argued that anticommunism was a serious, intelligent, and patriotic movement, despite its excesses. The American Communist Party, according to this view, was an agent of Stalin and the Soviet Union within the United States, actively engaged in espionage and subversion. The effort to root communists out of public life was both understandable and justifiable—and the hysteria it sometimes produced was an unhappy but predictable by-product of an essentially rational and justifiable effort. "Anticommunism," Powers wrote, "expressed the essential American determination to stand against attacks on human freedom and foster the growth of democracy throughout the world.... To superimpose on this rich history the cartoon features of Joe McCarthy is to reject history for the easy comforts of moralism."
Most interpretations, however, have been much less charitable. In the 1950s, in the midst of the Red Scare, an influential group of historians and social scientists began to portray the anticommunist fervor of their time as an expression of social maladjustment—an argument perhaps
(Rare Book and Special Collections Division, The Library of Congress)
LOOKING BACK
Even during World War II, when the United States and the Soviet Union were allies, it was evident to leaders in both nations that America and Russia had quite different visions of what the postwar world should look like. Very quickly after the war ended, those differences became visible to almost everyone, and the once fruitful relationship between the world’s two greatest powers quickly soured. Americans came to believe that the Soviet Union was an expansionist tyranny little different from Hitler’s Germany, that Josef Stalin, the Soviet leader, was bent on world conquest. Soviets came to believe that the United States was trying to protect its own dominance in the world by encircling the Soviet Union and trying to limit its ability to operate as a great power. The result of these tensions was what became known by the end of the 1940s as the Cold War.
Actual conflicts in the early years of the Cold War were
relatively few. Instead, the United States engaged in a series of
policies designed to prevent both war and Soviet aggression. It
helped rebuild the shattered nations of Western Europe with
substantial economic aid, through the Marshall Plan, to stabilize those nations and prevent them from becoming communist. America announced a new foreign policy-known as containment-that committed it to an effort to keep the Soviet Union from expanding its influence further into the world. The United States and Western Europe formed a strong and enduring alliance, NATO, to defend Europe against possible Soviet advances.
In 1950, however, the armed forces of communist North Korea launched an invasion of the noncommunist South; and to most Americans-including, most importantly, President Truman-the conflict quickly came to be seen as a test of American resolve in the Cold War. The Korean War was long, costly, and unpopular, with many military setbacks and frustrations. In the end, however, the United States-working through the United Nations-managed to drive the North Koreans out of the south and stabilize the original division of the peninsula.
750 *
most closely associated with Richard Hofstadter's essay “The Paranoid Style in American Politics. There was, they argued, no logical connection between the modest power of actual communists in the United States and the anticommunist hysteria. The fear of communism, they maintained, was rooted in social and cultural anxieties that had only an indirect connection with the political world. Extreme anticommunism, they claimed, was something close to a pathology; it expressed fear of and alienation from the modern world. A person afflicted with the "paranoid style," Hofstadter wrote:
believes himself to be living in a world in which he is spied upon, plotted against, betrayed, and very likely destined for total ruin. He feels that his liberties have been arbitrarily and outrageously invaded. He is opposed to almost everything that has happened in American politics in the past twenty years.
Other scholars, writing not long after the decline of McCarthyism, rejected the sociocultural argument but shared the belief that the crusade against subversion was a distortion of normal public life, They saw the anticommunist crusade as an example of party politics run amok. Richard Freeland, in The Truman Doctrine and the Origins of McCarthyism (1971), argued that the Democrats began the effort to purge the government of radicals to protect themselves from attacks by the Republicans. Nelson Polsby, Robert Griffith, and others have noted how Republicans seized on the issue of communism in government in the late 1940s to reverse their nearly twenty-year exclusion from power. With each party trying to outdo the other in its effort to demonstrate its anticommunist credentials, it was hardly surprising that the crusade reached extraordinarily intense proportions.
Still other historians have emphasized the role of powerful government officials and agencies with a strong commitment to anticommunism—most notably J. Edgar Hoover and the FBI. Athan Theoharis and Kenneth O'Reilly introduced the idea of an anticommunist bureaucracy in work published in the 1970s and 1980s. Ellen Schrecker, in Many Are the Crimes (1998), argues that the Red Scare was, at its heart, directed largely against the left and that it was orchestrated by an interlocking cluster of official agencies with a deep commitment to the project.
Several scholars, finally, have presented an argument that does not so much challenge other interpretations as complement them. Anticommunist zealots were not alone to blame for the excesses of McCarthyism, they argue. It was also the fault of liberals—in politics, in academia, and perhaps above all in the media—who were so intimidated by the political climate, or so imprisoned within the conventions of their professions, that they found themselves unable to respond effectively to the distortions and excesses they recognized around them. •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, AND EVALUATE
1.	Why did the American public feel so threatened by communism? Who exploited the public's fears and why?
2.	Was the public reaction to the Red Scare a logical response or disproportionate to the actual threat posed by communism?
3.	How were party politics and McCarthyism connected? Do you find elements similar to McCarthyism in politics today?
The Korean War had other effects on the domestic life of the United States. It hardened American foreign policy into a much more rigidly anticommunist form. It undermined the Truman administration, and the Democratic Party, and helped strengthen conservatives and Republicans. It greatly strengthened an already powerful crusade against communists, and those believed to be communists, within the United States-a
crusade often known as McCarthyism, because of the notoriety of Senator Joseph McCarthy of Wisconsin, the most celebrated leader of the effort.
America after World War II was indisputably the wealthiest and most powerful nation in the world. But in the harsh climate of the Cold War, neither wealth nor power could obscure deep anxieties and bitter divisions.
Key Terms/People/Places/Events
Alger Hiss 747
Atlantic Charter 733 Containment 736 Douglas MacArthur 736 Fair Deal 742 George F. Kennan 737 House Un-American Activities
Committee (HUAC) 747 Joseph McCarthy 749
Julius and Ethel Rosenberg 748 Mao Zedong 736 Marshall Plan 737 McCarthyism 749 National Security Act 738 North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) 739 NSC-68 740 Syngman Rhee 745
Taft-Hartley Act 742 Thomas E. Dewey 743 Truman Doctrine 737 United Nations 734 Warsaw Pact 740 Whittaker Chambers 748 Yalta Conference 734
752 • CHAPTER 27
RECALL AND REFLECT
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
1.	How did American diplomats plan for the postwar world and settle postwar issues? How did opposing visions of the postwar world order thwart those efforts?
2.	How did postwar economic problems affect American politics and society?
3.	Why did the United States become involved in the war in Korea? What was the result of U.S. involvement in that war?
4.	Why did the fear of communism at home reach such great proportions? What events helped fan that fear?
1941
Roosevelt and Churchill draft Atlantic Charter
1943
Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin meet at Teheran
1944
Gl Bill of Rights enacted
............I?4® ............
Atomic Energy Commission established
1945
Yalta Conference
Roosevelt dies; Harry S, Truman becomes president Potsdam Conference United Nations founded
1948
Berlin blockade prompts U.S. airlift
Truman elected president Hiss case begins Communists stage coup in Czechoslovakia
1950
Joseph McCarthy begins campaign against communists in government
NSC-68 outlines new U.S. policy toward communism Korean War begins
................ 1952 __
American occupation of Japan ends
Dwight D. Eisenhower elected president
1947
Taft-Hartley Act passed
HUAC begins investigating Hollywood film industry Truman Doctrine announced Marshall Plan proposed National Security Act passed
1949
NATO established Soviet Union explodes atomic
bomb
Communists seize power in China
1951
Truman removes MacArthur from command in Korea
OQ THE AFFLUENT
SOCIETY
AMERICAN TV
The arrival of television into American homes signaled a rapid, pervasive, and profound change in American life. TV viewing affected how Americans experienced entertainment and received their news. Television advertising helped create an enormous market for American products. With television, newspapers, radios, and the movies all lost some of their impact on American culture. (© Doug Steley C/Alamy (RF))
LOOKING AHEAD
1.	Why did the U.S. economy experience such a boom in the late 1950s and early 1960s? How did this boom affect American society?
2.	Who constituted the "other America,” who failed to share in the economic prosperity and affluence of the postwar era? Why were they left out?
3.	What was the response to the Supreme Court decision in Brown v. Board of Education? How did the Court's decision affect African Americans and the early civil rights movement? How did it affect white southerners?
4.	What policy guided foreign affairs under President Eisenhower, and how was that policy implemented around the world?
SETTING THE STAGE
IF AMERICA WAS EXPERIENCING A GOLDEN AGE IN THE 1950S
and early 1960s, as many Americans believed at the time and many continue to believe today, it was largely a result of two developments. One was a booming national prosperity, which profoundly altered the social, economic, and even physical landscape of the United States. The other was the continuing struggle against communism, a struggle that created great anxiety but that also encouraged some Americans to look even more approvingly at their own society. The politics of the 1950s seemed in many ways to reflect the combination of self-satisfaction and anxiety that affluence and the Cold War had created. There were, to be sure, many critics of American life in these years, but their influence was mostly limited to the margins of the nation's culture.
In retrospect, many of these marginalized critics appear to have understood the state of American life far better than those who so confidently celebrated the nation's successes, for there were serious social problems that most Americans largely ignored. More than 30 million Americans (20 percent of the population) continued to live in poverty in the 1950s, according to some measurements. Significant minorities continued to suffer social, political, and economic discrimination. Many American women were beginning to chafe at the obstacles to their personal and professional growth. The very things that made America seem so successful in the 1950s also contributed to bringing the nation's social problems more sharply into focus. But even in the 1950s, the first signs of the changes to come could be seen. The smooth surface of American public life could not obscure a growing restlessness,
ECONOMIC MIRACLE”
Among the most striking features of American society in the 1950s and early 1960s was a booming economic growth that made even the heady 1920s seem pale by comparison. It was a better-balanced and more widely distributed prosperity than that of thirty years earlier, but it was not as universal as some Americans liked to believe.
Sources of Economic Growth
Between 1945 and 1960, the gross national product grew by 250 percent, from $200 billion tc over $500 billion. Unemployment, which during the Depression had averaged between 15 anc 25 percent, remained throughout the 1950s and early 1960s at about 5 percent or lower. Inflation in the meantime, hovered around 3 percent a year or less.
The causes of this growth and stability were varied. Government spending, which had endec the Depression in the 1940s, continued to stimulate growth through public funding of schools Government housin& veterans’ benefits, welfare, the $100 billion interstate highway pro
Spending	gram, which began in 1956, and above all, military spending. Economic
growth was at its peak (averaging 4.7 percent a year) during the first half o the 1950s, when military spending was highest because of the Korean War. In the late 1950s with spending on armaments in decline, the annual rate of growth declined by more than half, tc
2.25 percent.
The national birth rate reversed a long pattern of decline with the so-called baby boom which had begun during the war and peaked in 1957. The nation’s population rose almost 20 percent ir the decade, from 150 million in 1950 to 179 million in I960. The baby boom contributed tc increased consumer demand and expanding economic growth.
The rapid expansion of suburbs- the suburban population grew 47 percent in the 1950s, more
Suburban	than twlce as fast as the population as a whole -helped stimulate growth ir
Growth	several important sectors of the economy. The number of privately owned car
(essential for most suburban living) more than doubled in a decade, sparking i great boom in the automobile industry. Demand for new homes helped sustain a vigorous housim
industry. The construction of roads and highways stimulated the economy as well
754 •
THE AFFLUENT SOCIETY
• 755 Births per thousand women 15-44 years old
1940	1945	1950	1955	1960
THE AMERICAN BIRTH RATE, 1940—1960
This chart shows how the American birth rate grew rapidly during and after World War II (after a long period of decline in the 1930s) to produce what became known as the "baby boom." At the peak of the baby boom, during the 1950s, the nation's population grew by 20 percent. (© Archive Photos/Getty Images) ' What impact did the baby boom have on the nation's economy?
Because of this unprecedented growth, the economy grew nearly ten times as fast as the population in the thirty years after the war. And while that growth was far from equally distributed, it affected most of society. The average American in I960 had over 20 percent more purchasing power than in 1945, and more than twice as much as during the prosperous 1920s. By 1960, per capita income was over $1,800, $500 more than it had been in 1945. The American people had achieved the highest standard of living of any society in the history of the world.
The Rise of the Modern West
No region of the country profited more from economic growth than the American West. Its population expanded dramatically; its cities boomed; its industrial economy flourished. Before World War II, most of the West had been, economically at least, an appendage of the great industrial economy of the East. The West provided the East with raw materials and agricultural goods. By the 1960s, however, some parts of the West had become among the most important (and populous) industrial and cultural centers of the nation in their own right. As during World War II, much of the growth of the West was a result of federal spending and investment—on the dams, power stations, highways, and other infrastructure projects that made economic development possible; and on the military contracts that continued to flow disproportionately to factories in California and Texas, many of them built with government funds during the war. But other factors played a role as well.
The enormous increase in automobile use after World War II—a result, among other things, of suburbanization and improved highway systems-gave a large stimulus to the petroleum industry and contributed to the rapid growth of oil fields in Texas and Colorado, and also to the metropolitan centers serving them: Houston, Dallas, and Denver. State governments in the West invested heavily in their universities. The University of Texas and University of California systems, in particular, became among the nation’s largest and best; as centers of research, they helped attract technology-intensive industries to the region.
Climate also contributed to economic growth. California, Nevada, and Arizona, in particular, attracted many migrants from the East because of their warm, dry climates. The growth
Favorable °f Los Angeles after World War II was Climate a particularly remarkable phenomenon.
More than 10 percent of all new businesses in the United States between 1945 and 1950 began in Los Angeles. Its population rose by over 50 percent between 1940 and 1960.
The New Economics
The discovery of the power of the American economic system was a major cause of the confident tone of much American political life in the 1950s. During the Depression, politicians, intellectuals, and others had often questioned the viability of capitalism. In the 1950s, such doubt vanished. Two features in particular made the postwar economy a source of national confidence.
First was the belief that Keynesian economics made it possible for government to regulate and stabilize the economy
Keynesian without intruding directly into the private Economics sector. The British economist John Maynard
Keynes had argued as early as the 1920s that by varying the flow of government spending and taxation (fiscal policy) and managing the supply of currency (monetary policy), the government could stimulate the economy to cure recession and dampen growth to prevent inflation. The experience of the last years of the Depression and the first years of the war had seemed to confirm this argument. By the mid-1950s, Keynesian theory was rapidly becoming a fundamental article of faith-not only among professional economists but also among much of the public.
The "new economics,” as its supporters came to call it, finally won official acceptance in 1963, when John Kennedy proposed a tax cut to stimulate economic growth. Although it took Kennedy’s death and the political skills of Lyndon Johnson to win passage of the measure in 1964, the result seemed to confirm all that the Keynesians had predicted: an increase in private demand, which stimulated economic growth and reduced unemployment.
As the economy continued to expand far beyond what anyone had predicted only a few years before, many Americans assumed that such growth was now without bounds. By the mid-1950s, reformers concerned about poverty were arguing
On the Road
, , H	* have traveled across the Americas for thousands of years, often with con-
siderable difficulty. Indians had to make paths over rough terrain. Immigrants from England, Scotland, Mexico, and many other places began to move from town to town often on log roads. Later, they used stones and pebbles to create new byways. Wagons and carriages often rode on bumpy or muddy surfaces. Of course, many years later more-efficient, comfortable roads
were built across the American continent, a development that changed American life dramatically.
JACK KEROUAC
Beat author Jack Kerouac's On the Road captured in literature the energy of a country on the move. The book's emphasis on jazz, beat poetry, and drugs, however, made it a notorious expression of the prevailing counterculture. (© Hulton Archive/Getty Images) In the mid-twentieth century, automobiles traveled more slowly than they do today. But cars allowed travelers to discover interesting places and meet new people as they moved from town to town. Jack Kerouac, in his famous book On the Road (1957), was one of the first to capture in writing the new spirit of automobile travel. "It was drizzling and mysterious at the beginning of our journey," Kerouac wrote as he got his battered car ready. "I could see that it was all going to be one big saga of the mist, . . . We were all delighted, when we all realized we were leaving confusion and nonsense behind and performing our one and noble function of the time, move. And we moved!"
In the 1950s, Route 66 was one of the first highways to cross most of the United States, from the West Coast to Chicago. But Route 66 became more than a road; it became a popular symbol of a country on the move. Travelers could drive along the famous highway while listening to the hit song "(Get Your Kicks On) Route 66" on the radio. A television series called Route 66 depicted characters becoming involved in all sorts of drama as they traveled the storied route.
People traveling long distances, perhaps even across the continent, needed restaurants, motels, and shops, a development that encouraged the creation of fast-food chains, many of which began with drive-in restaurants where customers could be served and eat in their cars. The first drive-in restaurant, Royce Hailey's Pig Stand, opened in Dallas in 1921, followed later in the decade by the White Tower. Ray Kroc's McDonald's opened its first outlets in Des Plaines,
Ending
Poverty
through
Economic
Growth
that the solution lay not in redistribution but in economic growth. The affluent would not have to sacrifice in order to eliminate poverty; the nation would simply have to produce more abundance, thus raising the quality of life of even the poorest
citizens to a level of comfort and decency.
Capital and Labor
Over 4,000 corporate mergers took place in the 1950s; and more than ever before, a relatively small number of large-scale organizations controlled an enormous proportion of the nation’s economic activity. This was particularly true in industries benefiting
Corporate from government defense spending. As Consolidation during World War II, the federal government tended to award military contracts to a few large corporations. In 1959, for example, half of all defense contracts went to only twenty firms. By the end of the decade, half the net corporate income in the nation was going to only slightly more than 500 firms, or one-tenth of 1 percent of the
total number of corporations.
A similar consolidation was occurring in the agricultural economy. As increasing mechanization reduced the need for farm labor, the agricultural workforce declined by more than half in the two decades after the war. Mechanization also endangered one of the most cherished American institutions: the family farm. By the 1960s, relatively few individuals could
ROUTE 66 The television show Route 66, starring George Maharis and Martin Milner, conveyed in popular culture the optimistic energy of a driving nation. (© CBS/Photofest)
Illinois, and southern California in 1955. Five years later, there were 228 outlets. In time, with thousands of restaurants, McDonald's became the most recognizable symbol of food in the world. Large supermarket chains—catering to customers with automobiles—replaced smaller, family-owned markets in town centers. Large centers and shopping malls moved the center of retailing out of cities and into separate, sprawling complexes surrounded by large parking lots.
Eventually, with President Eisenhower's encouragement, the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 provided money to build the interstate highway system. This network of highways made it possible for people to travel long distances quickly and efficiently. •
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE,
AND EVALUATE
1.	How did television programs like Route 66 of the mid-1950s reflect much older American myths about the American West?
2.	In what other ways than those described in this feature did the interstate highway system help the American economy?
3.	What military advantages did the highway system provide?
any longer afford to buy and equip a modern farm, and much of the nation's most productive land had been purchased by financial institutions and corporations.
Corporations enjoying booming growth were reluctant to allow strikes to interfere with their operations. As a result, business leaders made important concessions to unions. As early as 1948, Walter Reuther, president of the United Automobile Workers, obtained a contract from General Motors that included a built-in "escalator clause”-an automatic cost-of-living increase pegged to the consumer price index. In 1955, Reuther received a guarantee from Ford Motor Company of continuing wages to auto workers even during layoffs. By the mid-1950s, factory wages in all industries had risen substantially.
The "Postwar Contract5’
By the early 1950s, large labor unions had developed a new kind of relationship with employers, a relationship sometimes known as the "postwar contract.” Workers in steel, automobiles, and other large unionized industries were receiving gener-
ous increases in wages and benefits; in return, the unions tacitly agreed to refrain from raising other issues-issues involving control of the workplace and a voice for workers in the planning of production. Strikes became far less frequent.
The economic successes of the 1950s helped pave the way for a reunification of the labor movement. In December 1955, the American Federation of Labor and the Congress of Industrial Organizations ended their twenty-year rivalry and merged to create the AFL-CIO,
AFL-CIO
XI
