Chapter 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 1841–1848


 Roast Beef,” was reduced by unhappy Democrats to “Ten Cents a Day and Bean Soup.”

A
War of Words with Britain Hatred of Britain during the nineteenth century came to a head periodically and had to be lanced by treaty settlement or by war. The poison had festered ominously by 1842. Anti-British passions were composed of many ingredients. At bottom lay the bitter, red-coated memories of the two Anglo-American wars. In addition, the genteel pro-British Federalists had died out, eventually yielding to the boisterous Jacksonian Democrats. British travelers, snifﬁ ng with aristocratic noses at the crude scene, wrote acidly of American tobacco spitting, slave auctioneering, lynching, eye gouging, and other 
 Frances Trollope (1780–1863), an English writer disillusioned by the failure of a utopian community she had joined in Tennessee, wrote scathingly of the Americans in 1832,

“


 Other nations have been called thinskinned, but the citizens of the Union have, apparently, no skins at all; they wince if a breeze blows over them unless it be tempered with adulation.

”


 unsavory features of the rustic Republic. Travel books penned by these critics, whose views were avidly read on both sides of the Atlantic, stirred up angry outbursts in America. But the literary ﬁ reworks did not end there. British magazines added fuel to the ﬂames when, enlarging on the travel books, they launched sneering attacks on Yankee shortcomings. American journals struck back with “you’re another” arguments, thus touching off the “Third War with Eng land.” Fortunately, this BritishAmerican war was fought with paper broadsides, and only ink was spilled. British authors, including Charles Dickens, entered the fray with gall-dipped pens, for they were being denied rich royalties by the absence of an American copyright law.* Sprawling America, with expensive canals to dig and railroads to build, was a borrowing nation in the nineteenth century. Imperial Britain, with its overﬂowing coffers, was a lending nation. The well-heeled creditor is never popular with the down-at-the-heels debtor, and the phrase “bloated British bond-holder” rolled bitterly from many an American tongue. When the panic of 1837 broke and several states defaulted on their bonds or repudiated them openly, honest Englishmen assailed Yankee trickery. One of them offered a new stanza for an old song: Yankee Doodle borrows cash, Yankee Doodle spends it, And then he snaps his ﬁngers at The jolly ﬂat [simpleton] who lends it. Troubles of a more dangerous sort came closer to home in 1837 when a short-lived insurrection erupted

 The Land of Liberty, 1847 This British cartoon reﬂected the contemptuous view of American culture, politics, and diplomacy that was common in earlynineteenth-century Britain.

 *Not until 1891 did Congress extend copyright privileges to foreign authors.



 Tensions with Britain

Manipulating the
Maine Maps
 An explosive controversy of the early 1840s involved the Maine boundary dispute. The St. Lawrence River is icebound several months of the year, as the British, remembering the War of 1812, well knew. They were determined, as a defensive precaution against the Yankees, to build a road westward from the seaport of Halifax to Québec. But the proposed route ran through

 QUÉBEC

70°W


N


65°W


50 100 Km.






100 Mi.


 aw

 n re

 ce

 k oo

R.


R.


Ar


 oo

 st

NEW BRUNSWICK
St. John 
R


St


.L


 Québec

.


 in Canada. It was supported by such a small minority of Canadians that it never had a real chance of success. Yet hundreds of hot-blooded Americans, hoping to strike a blow for freedom against the hereditary enemy, furnished military supplies or volunteered for armed ser vice. The Washington regime tried arduously, though futilely, to uphold its weak neutrality regulations. But again, as in the case of Texas, it simply could not enforce unpopular laws in the face of popular opposition. A provocative incident on the Canadian frontier brought passions to a boil in 1837. An American steamer, the Caroline, was carrying supplies to the insurgents across the swift Niagara River. It was ﬁ nally attacked on the New York shore by a determined British force, which set the vessel on ﬁ re. Lurid American illustrators showed the ﬂaming ship, laden with shrieking souls, plummeting over Niagara Falls. The craft in fact sank short of the plunge, and only one American was killed. This unlawful invasion of American soil—a counterviolation of neutrality—had alarming aftermaths. Washington ofﬁcials lodged vigorous but ineffective protests. Three years later, in 1840, the incident was dramatically revived in the state of New York. A Canadian named McLeod, after allegedly boasting in a tavern of his part in the Caroline raid, was arrested and indicted for murder. The London Foreign Ofﬁce, which regarded the Caroline raiders as members of a sanctioned armed force and not as criminals, made clear that his execution would mean war. Fortunately, McLeod was freed after establishing an alibi. It must have been airtight, for it was good enough to convince a New York jury. The tension forthwith eased, but it snapped taut again in 1841, when British ofﬁcials in the Bahamas offered asylum to 130 Virginia slaves who had rebelled and captured the American ship Creole. Britain had abolished slavery within its empire in 1833, raising southern fears that its Caribbean possessions would become Canada-like havens for escaped slaves.

45°N


 Montréal

Halifax


MAINE NOVA SCOTIA

VT. N.H.

AT L A N T I C OCEAN

 Proposed road route Webster-Ashburton treaty line Given up by United States Acquired by United States

Map 17.1 Maine Boundary Settlement, 1842
Interactive Map


 disputed territory—claimed also by Maine under the misleading peace treaty of 1783. Tough-knuckled lumberjacks from both Maine and Canada entered the disputed no-man’s-land of the tall-timbered Aroostook River valley. Ugly ﬁghts ﬂared up, and both sides summoned the local militia. The small-scale lumberjack clash, which was dubbed the Aroostook War, threatened to widen into a full-dress shooting war. As the crisis deepened in 1842, the London Foreign Ofﬁce took an unusual step. It sent to Washington a nonprofessional diplomat, the conciliatory ﬁ nancier Lord Ashburton, who had married a wealthy American woman. He speedily established cordial relations with Secretary Webster, who had recently been lionized during a visit to Britain. The two statesmen, their nerves frayed by protracted negotiations in the heat of a Washington summer, ﬁ nally agreed to compromise on the Maine boundary (see Map 17.1). On the basis of a rough, splitthe-difference arrangement, the Americans were to retain some 7,000 square miles of the 12,000 square miles of wilderness in dispute. The British got less land but won the desired Halifax-Québec route. During the negotiations the Caroline affair, malingering since 1837, was patched up by an exchange of diplomatic notes.



Chapter 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 1841–1848


 An overlooked bonus sneaked by in the small print of the same treaty: the British, in adjusting the U.S.Canadian boundary farther west, surrendered 6,500 square miles. The area was later found to contain the priceless Mesabi iron ore of Minnesota.

The Lone Star of
Texas Shines Alone
 During the uncertain eight years since 1836, Texas had led a precarious existence. Mexico, refusing to recognize Texas’s independence, regarded the Lone Star Republic as a province in revolt, to be reconquered in the future. Mexican ofﬁcials loudly threatened war if the American eagle should ever gather the ﬂedgling republic under its protective wings. The Texans were forced to maintain a costly military establishment. Vastly outnumbered by their Mexican foe, they could not tell when he would strike again. Mexico actually did make two halfhearted raids that, though ineffectual, foreshadowed more fearsome efforts. Confronted with such perils, Texas was driven to open negotiations with Britain and France, in the hope of securing the defensive shield of a protectorate. In 1839 and 1840, the Texans concluded treaties with France, Holland, and Belgium. Britain was intensely interested in an independent Texas. Such a republic would check the southward surge of the American colossus, whose bulging biceps posed a constant threat to nearby British possessions in the New World. A puppet Texas, dancing to strings pulled by Britain, could be turned upon the Yankees. Subsequent clashes would create a smoke-screen diversion, behind which foreign powers could move into the Americas and challenge the insolent Monroe Doctrine. French schemers were likewise attracted by the hoary game of divide and conquer. These actions would result, they hoped, in the fragmentation and militarization of America. Dangers threatened from other foreign quarters. British abolitionists were busily intriguing for a foothold in Texas. If successful in freeing the few blacks there, they presumably would inﬂame the nearby slaves of the South. In addition, British merchants regarded Texas as a potentially important free-trade area—an offset to the tariff-walled United States. British manufacturers likewise perceived that those vast Texas plains constituted one of the great cottonproducing areas of the future. An independent Texas would relieve British looms of their chronic depen-

 dence on American ﬁber—a supply that might be cut off in time of crisis by embargo or war.

The Belated Texas Nuptials
 Partly because of the fears aroused by British schemers, Texas became a leading issue in the presidential campaign of 1844. The foes of expansion assailed annexation, while southern hotheads cried, “Texas or Disunion.” The pro-expansion Democrats under James K. Polk ﬁ nally triumphed over the Whigs under Henry Clay, the hardy perennial candidate. Lame duck president Tyler thereupon interpreted the narrow Democratic victory, with dubious accuracy, as a “mandate” to acquire Texas. Eager to crown his troubled administration with this splendid prize, Tyler deserves much of the credit for shepherding Texas into the fold. Many Conscience Whigs feared that Texas in the Union would be red meat to nourish the lusty “slave power.” Aware of their opposition, Tyler despaired of securing the needed two-thirds vote for a treaty in the Senate. He therefore arranged for annexation by a joint resolution. This solution required only a simple majority in both houses of Congress. After a spirited debate, the resolution passed early in 1845, and Texas was formally invited to become the twenty-eighth star on the American ﬂag. Mexico angrily charged that the Americans had despoiled it of Texas. This was to some extent true in 1836, but hardly true in 1845, for the area was no longer

 Thomas J. Green (1801–1863), who served as a brigadier general in the Texas Revolution, published a pamphlet in 1845 to make the case for American support of an independent Texas:

“


 Both the government of the United States and Texas are founded upon the same political code. They have the same common origin—the same language, laws, and religion—the same pursuits and interests; and though they may remain independent of each other as to government, they are identiﬁed in weal and wo’—they will ﬂourish side by side and the blight which affects the one will surely reach the other.

”


 Trouble over Texas

 Mexico’s to be despoiled of. As the years stretched out, realistic observers could see that the Mexicans would not be able to reconquer their lost province. Yet Mexico left the Texans dangling by denying their right to dispose of themselves as they chose. By 1845 the Lone Star Republic had become a danger spot, inviting foreign intrigue that menaced the American people. The continued existence of Texas as an independent nation threatened to involve the United States in a series of ruinous wars, both in America and in Europe. Americans were in a “lick all creation” mood when they sang “Uncle Sam’s Song to Miss Texas”: If Mexy back’d by secret foes, Still talks of getting you, gal; Why we can lick ’em all you know And then annex ’em too, gal. What other power would have spurned the imperial domain of Texas? The bride was so near, so rich, so fair, so willing. Whatever the peculiar circumstances of the Texas Revolution, the United States can hardly be accused of unseemly haste in achieving annexation. Nine long years were surely a decent wait between the beginning of the courtship and the consummation of the marriage.



Oregon Fever
Populates Oregon
 The so-called Oregon Country was an enormous wilderness. It sprawled magniﬁcently west of the Rockies to the Paciﬁc Ocean, and north of Cal i fornia to the line of 54° 40?—the present southern tip of the Alaska panhandle. All or substantial parts of this immense area were claimed at one time or another by four nations: Spain, Russia, Britain, and the United States. Two claimants dropped out of the scramble. Spain, though the ﬁ rst to raise its banner in Oregon, bartered away its claims to the United States in the so-called Florida Treaty of 1819. Russia retreated to the line of 54° 40' by the treaties of 1824 and 1825 with America and Britain. These two remaining rivals now had the ﬁeld to themselves. British claims to Oregon were strong—at least to that portion north of the Columbia River. They were based squarely on prior discovery and exploration, on treaty rights, and on actual occupation. The most important colonizing agency was the far-ﬂung Hudson’s Bay Company, which was trading proﬁtably with the Indians of the Paciﬁc Northwest for furs.

 St. Louis in 1846, by Henry Lewis Thousands of pioneers like these pulling away from St. Louis said farewell to civilization as they left the Mississippi River and headed across the untracked plains to Oregon in the 1840s.



Chapter 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 1841–1848


 Pundt and Koenig’s General Store, Omaha City, Nebraska, 1858 Settlers bound for Colorado and California stopped here for provisions before venturing farther west across the open plains.

 Americans, for their part, could also point pridefully to exploration and occupation. Captain Robert Gray in 1792 had stumbled upon the majestic Columbia River, which he named after his ship; and the famed Lewis and Clark expedition of 1804–1806 had ranged overland through the Oregon Country to the Paciﬁc. This shaky American toehold was ultimately strength-

 In winning Oregon, the Americans had great faith in their procreative powers. Boasted one congressman in 1846,

“


 Our people are spreading out with the aid of the American multiplication table. Go to the West and see a young man with his mate of eighteen; after the lapse of thirty years, visit him again, and instead of two, you will ﬁnd twenty-two. That is what I call the American multiplication table.

”


 ened by the presence of missionaries and other settlers, a sprinkling of whom reached the grassy Willamette River valley, south of the Columbia, in the 1830s. These men and women of God, in saving the soul of the Indian, were instrumental in saving the soil of Oregon for the United States. They stimulated interest in a faraway domain that countless Americans had earlier assumed would not be settled for centuries. Scattered American and British pioneers in Oregon continued to live peacefully side by side. At the time of negotiating the Anglo-American Convention of 1818 (see pp. 265–266), the United States had sought to divide the vast domain at the forty-ninth parallel. But the British, who regarded the Columbia River as the St. Lawrence of the West, were unwilling to yield this vital artery. A scheme for peaceful “joint occupation” was thereupon adopted, pending future settlement. The handful of Americans in the Willamette Valley was suddenly multiplied in the early 1840s, when “Oregon fever” seized hundreds of restless pioneers. In increasing numbers, their creaking covered wagons jolted over the two-thousand-mile Oregon Trail as the

The Oregon Controversy


 human rivulet widened into a stream.* By 1846 about ﬁve thousand Americans had settled south of the Columbia River, some of them tough “border rufﬁans,” expert with bowie knife and “revolving pistol.” The British, in the face of this rising torrent of humanity, could muster only seven hundred or so subjects north of the Columbia. Losing out lopsidedly in the population race, they were beginning to see the wisdom of arriving at a peaceful settlement before being engulfed by their neighbors. A curious fact is that only a relatively small segment of the Oregon Country was in actual controversy by 1845. The area in dispute consisted of the rough quadrangle between the Columbia River on the south and east, the forty-ninth parallel on the north, and the Paciﬁc Ocean on the west. Britain had repeatedly offered the line of the Columbia; America had repeatedly offered the forty-ninth parallel. The whole fateful issue was now tossed into the presidential election of 1844, where it was largely overshadowed by the question of annexing Texas.

A
Mandate (?) for Manifest Destiny
 The two major parties nominated their presidential standard-bearers in May 1844. Ambitious but often frustrated Henry Clay, easily the most popular man in the country, was enthusiastically chosen by the Whigs at Baltimore. The Democrats, meeting there later, seemed hopelessly deadlocked. Van Buren’s opposition to annexing Texas ensured his defeat, given domination of the party by southern expansionists. Finally party delegates trotted out and nominated James K. Polk of Tennessee, America’s ﬁ rst “dark-horse” or “surprise” presidential candidate. Polk may have been a dark horse, but he was hardly an unknown or decrepit nag. Speaker of the House of Representatives for four years and governor of Tennessee for two terms, he was a determined, industrious, ruthless, and intelligent public servant. Sponsored by Andrew Jackson, his friend and neighbor, he was rather implausibly touted by Democrats as yet another “Young Hickory.” Whigs attempted to jeer him into oblivion

 *The average rate of progress in covered wagons was one to two miles an hour. This amounted to about one hundred miles a week, or about ﬁve months for the entire journey. Thousands of humans, in addition to horses and oxen, died en route. One estimate is seventeen deaths a mile for men, women, and children.



 Manifest Destiny: A Caricature The spirit of Manifest Destiny swept the nation in the 1840s, and threatened to sweep it to extremes. This cartoon from 1848 lampoons proslavery Democratic presidential candidate Lewis Cass as a veritable war machine, bent on the conquest of territory ranging from New Mexico to Cuba and even Peru.

 with the taunt, “Who is James K. Polk?” They soon found out. The campaign of 1844 was in part an expression of the mighty emotional upsurge known as Manifest Destiny. Countless citizens in the 1840s and 1850s, feeling a sense of mission, believed that Almighty God had “manifestly” destined the American people for a hemispheric career. They would irresistibly spread their uplifting and ennobling democratic institutions over at least the entire continent, and possibly over South America as well. Land greed and ideals—“empire” and “liberty”—were thus conveniently conjoined. Expansionist Democrats were strongly swayed by the intoxicating spell of Manifest Destiny. They came out ﬂat-footedly in their platform for the “Reannexation of Texas”* and the “Reoccupation of Oregon,” all the way to 54° 40'. Outbellowing the Whig logcabinites in the game of slogans, they shouted “All of Oregon or None.” (The slogan “Fifty-four forty or ﬁght” was not coined until two years later, in 1846.) They also condemned Clay as a “corrupt bargainer,” a dissolute

 *The United States had given up its claims to Texas in the so-called Florida Purchase Treaty (Adams-Onís Treaty) with Spain in 1819 (see p. 267).



Chapter 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 1841–1848


 Westward the Course of Empire Takes Its Way This romantic tribute to the spirit of Manifest Destiny was commissioned by Congress in 1860 and may still be seen in the Capitol.

 character, and a slaveowner. (Their own candidate, Polk, also owned slaves—a classic case of the pot calling the kettle black.) The Whigs, as noisemakers, took no backseat. They countered with such slogans as “Hooray for Clay” and “Polk, Slavery, and Texas, or Clay, Union, and Liberty.” They also spread the lie that a gang of Tennessee slaves had been seen on their way to a southern market branded with the initials J. K. P. (James K. Polk). On the crucial issue of Texas, the acrobatic Clay tried to ride two horses at once. The “Great Compromiser” appears to have compromised away the presidency when he wrote a series of confusing letters. They seemed to say that while he personally favored annexing slaveholding Texas (an appeal to the South), he also favored postponement (an appeal to the North). He might have lost more ground if he had not “straddled,” but he certainly alienated the more ardent antislaveryites. In the stretch drive, “Dark Horse” Polk nipped Henry Clay at the wire, 170 to 105 votes in the Electoral College and 1,338,464 to 1,300,097 in the popular column. Clay would have won if he had not lost New York State by a scant 5,000 votes. There the tiny antislavery Liberty party absorbed nearly 16,000 votes, many of which would otherwise have gone to the unlucky Kentuckian. Ironically, the anti-Texas Liberty party, by spoiling Clay’s chances and helping to ensure the elec-

 tion of pro-Texas Polk, hastened the annexation of Texas. Land-hungry Democrats, ﬂushed with victory, proclaimed that they had received a mandate from the voters to take Texas. But a presidential election is seldom, if ever, a clear-cut mandate on anything. The only way to secure a true reﬂection of the voters’ will is to hold a special election on a given issue. The picture that emerged in 1844 was one not of mandate but of muddle. What else could there have been when the results were so close, the personalities so colorful, and the issues so numerous—including Oregon, Texas, the tariff, slavery, the bank, and internal improvements? Yet this unclear “mandate” was interpreted by President Tyler as a crystal-clear charge to annex Texas— and he signed the joint resolution three days before leaving the White House.

Polk the Purposeful
 “Young Hickory” Polk, unlike “Old Hickory” Jackson, was not an impressive ﬁgure. Of middle height (ﬁve feet eight inches), lean, white-haired (worn long), grayeyed, and stern-faced, he took life seriously and drove himself mercilessly into a premature grave. His burdens were increased by an unwillingness to delegate authority. Methodical and hard-working but not bril-



Polk Takes Command


 total

Against










130°W


60°N






120°W




110°W


 Focus of dispute by 1846

300 Km.


 Area of original dispute over Oregon

300 Mi.


 ALASKA (Russia)

BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

54°4


'N


.


Treat y of 1818


 MO

 b i a R.

 OREGON

 UN

Ft.
COUNTRY
Vancouver 
TA I

Ore


 NS

 a Tr

 il

Ad a m s


 n

Willamette
Valley


 go

42°N


Y


 rI

PAC I F IC OCEAN

N


 CK

 ve

 u Compromise line, 1846

 r R.

 co

49°N


 RO

Frase


50°N
 n Va

 liant, he was shrewd, narrow-minded, conscientious, and persistent. “What he went for he fetched,” wrote a contemporary. Purposeful in the highest degree, he developed a positive four-point program and with remarkable success achieved it completely in less than four years. One of Polk’s goals was a lowered tariff. His secretary of the Treasury, wispy Robert J. Walker, devised a tariff-for-revenue bill that reduced the average rates of the Tariff of 1842 from about 32 percent to 25 percent. With the strong support of low-tariff southerners, the Walker Tariff bill made its way through Congress, though not without loud complaints from the Clayites, especially in New Eng land and the middle states, who cried that American manufacturing would be ruined (see Table 17.1). But these prophets of doom missed the mark. The Walker Tariff of 1846 proved to be an excellent revenue producer, largely because it was followed by boom times and heavy imports. A second objective of Polk was the restoration of the independent treasury, unceremoniously dropped by the Whigs in 1841. Pro-bank Whigs in Congress raised a storm of opposition, but victory at last rewarded the president’s efforts in 1846. The third and fourth points on Polk’s “must list” were the acquisition of Cal i fornia and the settlement of the Oregon dispute (see Map 17.2). “Reoccupation” of the “whole” of Oregon had been promised northern Democrats in the campaign of 1844. But southern Democrats, once they had annexed Texas, rapidly cooled off. Polk, himself a southerner, had no intention of insisting on the 54° 40' pledge of his own platform. But feeling bound by the three offers of his predecessors to London, he again proposed the compromise line of 49°. The British minister in Washington, on his own initiative, brusquely spurned this olive branch. The next move on the Oregon chessboard was up to Britain. Fortunately for peace, the ministry began to experience a change of heart. British anti-expansionists

R


 New Eng land Middle states West and Northwest South and Southwest

For


.


M i s s o u r i R.
Yellow


 sto

 ne R.

UNITED STATES

 k

 e

Region


 (“Little Eng landers”) were now persuaded that the Columbia River was not after all the St. Lawrence of the West and that the turbulent American hordes might one day seize the Oregon Country. Why ﬁght a hazardous war over this wilderness on behalf of an unpopular monopoly, the Hudson’s Bay Company, which had already “furred out” much of the area anyhow? Early in 1846 the British, hat in hand, came around and themselves proposed the line of 49°. President Polk, irked by the previous rebuff, threw the decision squarely into the lap of the Senate. The senators speedily accepted the offer and approved the subsequent treaty, despite a few diehard shouts of “Fifty-four forty forever!” and “Every foot or not an inch!” The fact that the United States was then a month deep in a war with Mexico doubtless inﬂuenced the Senate’s ﬁ nal vote. Satisfaction with the Oregon settlement among Amer icans was not unanimous. The northwestern states, hotbed of Manifest Destiny and “ﬁ fty-four fortyism,” joined the antislavery forces in condemning what they regarded as a base betrayal by the South. Why all

Colu m


Table 17.1 House Vote on Tariff of 1846


 - Onís Tr e a t y o f 18 1

Sna


40°N


 MEXICO

Map 17.2 The Oregon Controversy, 1846
Interactive Map




Chapter 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 1841–1848


Fort Vancouver, Oregon Country, ca. 1846 Fort Vancouver, on the Columbia
 River near its conﬂuence with the Willamette River, was the economic hub of the Oregon Country during the early years of settlement. Founded as a Hudson’s Bay Company fur-trading outpost, the fort was handed over to the Americans when Britain ceded the Oregon Country to the United States in 1846.

 of Texas but not all of Oregon? Because, retorted the expansionist Senator Benton of Missouri, “Great Britain is powerful and Mexico is weak.” So Polk, despite all the campaign bluster, got neither “ﬁ fty-four forty” nor a ﬁght. But he did get something that in the long run was better: a reasonable compromise without a riﬂe being raised.

Misunderstandings
 with Mexico Faraway California was another worry of Polk’s. He and other disciples of Manifest Destiny had long coveted its verdant valleys, and especially the spacious bay of San Francisco. This splendid harbor was widely regarded as America’s future gateway to the Paciﬁc Ocean.

 The population of Cal i fornia in 1845 was curiously mixed. It consisted of perhaps thirteen thousand sunblessed Spanish Mexicans and as many as seventy-ﬁve thousand dispirited Indians. There were fewer than a thousand “foreigners,” mostly Americans, some of whom had “left their consciences” behind them as they rounded Cape Horn. Given time, these transplanted Yankees might yet bring Cal i fornia into the Union by “playing the Texas game.” Polk was eager to buy Cal i fornia from Mexico, but relations with Mexico City were dangerously embittered. Among other friction points, the United States had claims against the Mexicans for some $3 million in damages to American citizens and their property. The revolution-riddled regime in Mexico had formally agreed to assume most of this debt but had been forced to default on its payments.

Causes of the Mexican War




The Landowner and
His Foreman, by Julio
Michard, 1839
This California
 ranchero’s way of life was soon to be extinguished when California became part of the United States in 1848 and thousands of American gold-seekers rushed into the state the following year.

 A more serious bone of contention was Texas. The Mexican government, after threatening war if the United States should acquire the Lone Star Republic, had recalled its minister from Washington following annexation. Diplomatic relations were completely severed. Deadlock with Mexico over Texas was further tightened by a question of boundaries. During the long era of Spanish Mexican occupation, the southwestern boundary of Texas had been the Nueces River. But the expansive Texans, on rather far-fetched grounds, were claiming the more southerly Rio Grande instead. Polk, for his part, felt a strong moral obligation to defend Texas in its claim, once it was annexed. The Mexicans were far less concerned about this boundary quibble than was the United States. In their eyes all of Texas was still theirs, although temporarily in revolt, and a dispute over the two rivers seemed pointless. Yet Polk was careful to keep American troops out of virtually all of the explosive no-man’s-land between the Nueces and the Rio Grande, as long as there was any real prospect of peaceful adjustment. The golden prize of Cal i fornia continued to cause Polk much anxiety. Disquieting rumors (now known to have been ill-founded) were circulating that Britain was about to buy or seize Cal i fornia—a grab that Americans could not tolerate under the Monroe Doctrine. In a last desperate throw of the dice, Polk dispatched John Slidell to Mexico City as minister late in 1845. The

 new envoy, among other alternatives, was instructed to offer a maximum of $25 million for Cal i fornia and territory to the east. But the proud Mexican people would not even permit Slidell to present his “insulting” proposition.

American Blood on
American (?) Soil
 A frustrated Polk was now prepared to force a showdown. On January 13, 1846, he ordered four thousand men, under General Zachary Taylor, to march from the Nueces River to the Rio Grande, provocatively near Mexican forces. Polk’s presidential diary reveals that he expected at any moment to hear of a clash. When none occurred after an anxious wait, he informed his cabinet on May 9, 1846, that he proposed to ask Congress to declare war on the basis of (1) unpaid claims and (2) Slidell’s rejection. These, at best, were rather ﬂ imsy pretexts. Two cabinet members spoke up and said that they would feel better satisﬁed if Mexican troops should ﬁ re ﬁ rst. That very evening, as fate would have it, news of bloodshed arrived. On April 25, 1846, Mexican troops had crossed the Rio Grande and attacked General Taylor’s command, with a loss of sixteen Americans killed or wounded.



Chapter 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 1841–1848


 Polk, further aroused, sent a vigorous war message to Congress. He declared that despite “all our efforts” to avoid a clash, hostilities had been forced upon the country by the shedding of “American blood upon the American soil.” A patriotic Congress overwhelmingly voted for war, and enthusiastic volunteers cried, “Ho for the Halls of the Montezumas!” and “Mexico or Death!” Inﬂamed by the war fever, even antislavery Whig bastions melted and joined with the rest of the nation, though they later condemned “Jimmy Polk’s war.” As James Russell Lowell of Massachusetts lamented, Massachusetts, God forgive her, She’s akneelin’ with the rest. In his message to Congress, Polk was making history—not writing it. Like many presidents with ambitious foreign-policy goals, he felt justiﬁed in bending the truth if that was what it took to bend a reluctant public toward war. If he had been a historian, Polk would have explained that American blood had been shed on soil that the Mexicans had good reason to regard as their own. A gangling, rough-featured Whig congressman from Illinois, one Abraham Lincoln, introduced certain resolutions that requested information as to the precise “spot” on American soil where American blood had been shed. He pushed his spot resolutions with such persistence that he came to be known as the “spotty Lincoln,” who could die of “spotted fever.” The more extreme antislavery agitators of the North, many of them Whigs, branded the president a liar—“Polk the Mendacious.” Did Polk provoke war? Cal i fornia was an imperative point in his program, and Mexico would not sell it at any price. The only way to get it was to use force or wait for an internal American revolt. Yet delay seemed dangerous, for the claws of the British lion might snatch the ripening Cal i fornia fruit from the talons of the

 On June 1, 1860, less than a year before he became president, Abraham Lincoln (1809–1865) wrote,

“


 The act of sending an armed force among the Mexicans was unnecessary, inasmuch as Mexico was in no way molesting or menacing the United States or the people thereof; and . . . it was unconstitutional, because the power of levying war is vested in Congress, and not in the President.

”


 American eagle. Grievances against Mexico were annoying yet tolerable; in later years America endured even worse ones. But in 1846 patience had ceased to be a virtue, as far as Polk was concerned. Bent on grasping Cal i fornia by fair means or foul, he pushed the quarrel to a bloody showdown. Both sides, in fact, were spoiling for a ﬁght. Feisty Americans, especially southwestern expansionists, were eager to teach the Mexicans a lesson. The Mexicans, in turn, were burning to humiliate the “Bullies of the North.” Possessing a considerable standing army, heavily overstaffed with generals, they boasted of invading the United States, freeing the black slaves, and lassoing whole regiments of Americans. They were hoping that the quarrel with Britain over Oregon would blossom into a full-dress war, as it came near doing, and further pin down the hated yanquis. A conquest of Mexico’s vast and arid expanses seemed fantastic, especially in view of the bungling American invasion of Canada in 1812. Both sides were ﬁ red by moral indignation. The Mexican people could ﬁght with the ﬂaming sword of righteousness, for had not the “insolent” Yankee picked a ﬁght by polluting their soil? Many earnest Americans, on the other hand, sincerely believed that Mexico was the aggressor.

The Mastering of Mexico
 Polk wanted Cal i fornia—not war. But when war came, he hoped to ﬁght it on a limited scale and then pull out when he had captured the prize. The dethroned Mexican dictator Santa Anna, then exiled with his teenage bride in Cuba, let it be known that if the American blockading squadron would permit him to slip into Mexico, he would sell out his country. Incredibly, Polk agreed to this discreditable intrigue. But the doublecrossing Santa Anna, once he returned to Mexico, proceeded to rally his countrymen to a desperate defense of their soil. American operations in the Southwest and in Cal ifornia were completely successful (see Map 17.3). In 1846 General Stephen W. Kearny led a detachment of seventeen hundred troops over the famous Santa Fe Trail from Fort Leavenworth to Santa Fe. This sunbaked outpost, with its drowsy plazas, was easily captured. But before Kearny could reach Cal i fornia, the fertile province was won. When war broke out, Captain John C. Frémont, the dashing explorer, just “happened” to be there with several dozen well-armed men. In help-



Causes of the Mexican War


 ing to overthrow Mexican rule in 1846, he collaborated with American naval ofﬁcers and with the local Americans, who had hoisted the banner of the short-lived California Bear Flag Republic. General Zachary Taylor meanwhile had been spearheading the main thrust. Known as “Old Rough and Ready” because of his iron constitution and incredibly unsoldierly appearance—he sometimes wore a Mexican straw hat—he fought his way across the Rio Grande into Mexico. After several gratifying victories, he reached Buena Vista. There, on February 22–23, 1847, his weakened force of ﬁve thousand men was attacked by some twenty thousand march-weary troops under Santa Anna. The Mexicans were ﬁ nally repulsed with extreme difﬁculty, and overnight Zachary Taylor

 became the “Hero of Buena Vista.” One Kentuckian was heard to say that “Old Zack” would be elected president in 1848 by “spontaneous combustion.” Sound American strategy now called for a crushing blow at the enemy’s vitals—Mexico City. General Taylor, though a good leader of modest-sized forces, could not win decisively in the semideserts of northern Mexico. The command of the main expedition, which pushed inland from the coastal city of Veracruz early in 1847, was entrusted to General Winﬁeld Scott. A handsome giant of a man, Scott had emerged as a hero from the War of 1812 and had later earned the nickname “Old Fuss and Feathers” because of his resplendent uniforms and strict discipline. He was severely handicapped in the Mexican campaign by inadequate Interactive Map

Map 17.3 Major Campaigns of the Mexican War
120°W


100°W


110°W


 WISCONSIN

 t

R.


 m



 de

N


Woo
 l1

Sl o


 FL.

Nuece


 sR . Corpus Christi

 at

LOUISIANA
New Orleans 
Sc


San Luis
Potosí


 Mexican victory 20°N





N


Gulf of
Mexico


Monterrey
Sept. 19–24, 1846


Mexico City
Sept. 13–14, 1847


Tampico
Occupied
Nov. 14,1846


Sc


 Mazatlán

 U.S. movements

 t ot

San ta Anna


 Mexican movements

 Mexican cession, 1848



 GA.

 MISS.

Fort
Sam Houston


Buena Vista
Feb. 22–23, 1847




 U.S. naval blockade

 ALA.

Matamoros


 Disputed area

 U.S. victory

 ARKANSAS

(San Antonio)


Chihuahua


400 Km.
400 Mi.


 TENNESSEE

R
 INDIAN . TERRITORY

T E X AS
 an

Donipha
 n

Ri o


Gr


 EA

Sacramento
Feb. 28, 1847




UNITED STATES

El Brazito
Dec. 25, 1846




30°N


 as

 KENTUCKY

R.


 OC

San San Pasqual
Diego Dec. 6, 1846


Santa Fe
Occupied Aug. 18, 1846
Valverde
Dec. 12, 1846


 ns

 pi



Kearny


 sip

 MEXICO

 sis

Taos Revolt
Feb. 3–4, 1847


 IND.

 MISSOURI

R.


 ka

Los Angeles
San Gabriel
Jan. 8, 1847


 ra

 rny 1848 Ar

Colo


 do

 a Ke

 OHIO

M


 is

 Bent’s Fort

 n to ck Sto

FIC PACI

ILLINOIS
Fort Leavenworth 
Monterey
Occupied July 7, 1846




 IOWA

Fr é


Yerba Buena
(San Francisco)
Occupied July 10, 1846




 e R.

 on

Platt


 ri

4 5–


 sou

Bear Flag Revolt
June 14, 1845


MIC H. TER R.

UNORGANIZED TERRITORY
Mis 
 Frémont 1846

OREGON TERRITORY
(1846) 
40°N


90°W


 Mérida

 ott 1847

Cerro Gordo
April 17–18, 1847


Veracruz
Occupied
March 29,1847




Chapter 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 1841–1848


 numbers of troops, by expiring enlistments, by a more numerous enemy, by mountainous terrain, by disease, and by political backbiting at home. Yet he succeeded in battling his way up to Mexico City by September 1847 in one of the most brilliant campaigns in American military annals. He proved to be the most distinguished general produced by his country between the Revolution and the Civil War.

Fighting Mexico for Peace
 Polk was anxious to end the shooting as soon as he could secure his territorial goals. Accordingly, he sent along with Scott’s invading army the chief clerk of the State Department, Nicholas P. Trist, who among other weaknesses was afﬂ icted with an overﬂuid pen. Trist and Scott arranged for an armistice with Santa Anna, at a cost of $10,000. The wily dictator pocketed the bribe and then used the time to bolster his defenses.

 War News from Mexico, by Richard Caton Woodville The newfangled telegraph kept the nation closely informed of events in far-off Mexico.

 Negotiating a treaty with a sword in one hand and a pen in the other was ticklish business. Polk, disgusted with his blundering envoy, abruptly recalled Trist. The wordy diplomat then dashed off a sixty-ﬁve-page letter explaining why he was not coming home. The president was furious. But Trist, grasping a ﬂeeting opportunity to negotiate, signed the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo on February 2, 1848, and forwarded it to Washington. The terms of the treaty were breathtaking. They conﬁ rmed the American title to Texas and yielded the enormous area stretching westward to Oregon and the ocean and embracing coveted Cal i fornia. This total expanse, including Texas, was about one-half of Mexico. The United States agreed to pay $15 million for the land and to assume the claims of its citizens against Mexico in the amount of $3,250,000 (see “Makers of America: The Californios,” pp. 412–413). Polk submitted the treaty to the Senate. Although Trist had proved highly annoying, he had generally

 The Peace Settlement with Mexico

 followed his original instructions. And speed was imperative. The antislavery Whigs in Congress—dubbed “Mexican Whigs” or “Conscience Whigs”—were denouncing this “damnable war” with increasing heat. Having secured control of the House in 1847, they were even threatening to vote down supplies for the armies in the ﬁeld. If they had done so, Scott probably would have been forced to retreat, and the fruits of victory might have been tossed away. Another peril impended. A swelling group of expansionists, intoxicated by Manifest Destiny, was clamoring for all of Mexico. If America had seized it, the nation would have been saddled with an expensive and vexatious policing problem. Farseeing southerners like Calhoun, alarmed by the mounting anger of antislavery agitators, realized that the South would do well not to be too greedy. The treaty was ﬁ nally approved by the Senate, 38 to 14. Oddly enough, it was condemned both by those opponents who wanted all of Mexico and by opponents who wanted none of it. Victors rarely pay an indemnity, especially after a costly conﬂ ict has been “forced” on them. Yet Polk, who had planned to offer $25 million before ﬁghting the war, arranged to pay $18,250,000 after winning it. Cynics have charged that the Americans were pricked by guilty consciences; apologists have pointed proudly to the “Anglo-Saxon spirit of fair play.” A decisive factor was the need for haste, while there was still a responsible Mexican government to carry out the treaty and before political foes in the United States, notably the antislavery zealots, sabotaged Polk’s expansionist program.

 Early in 1848 the New York Evening Post demanded,

“


 Now we ask, whether any man can coolly contemplate the idea of recalling our troops from the [Mexican] territory we at present occupy . . . and . . . resign this beautiful country to the custody of the ignorant cowards and proﬂigate rufﬁans who have ruled it for the last twenty-ﬁve years? Why, humanity cries out against it. Civilization and Christianity protest against this reﬂux of the tide of barbarism and anarchy.

 Such was one phase of Manifest Destiny.

”




 Proﬁt and Loss in Mexico As wars go, the Mexican War was a small one. It cost some thirteen thousand American lives, most of them taken by disease. But the fruits of the ﬁghting were enormous. America’s total expanse, already vast, was increased by about one-third (counting Texas)—an addition even greater than that of the Louisiana Purchase. A sharp stimulus was given to the spirit of Manifest Destiny, for as the proverb has it, the appetite comes with eating. The Mexican War proved to be the blood-spattered schoolroom of the Civil War. The campaigns provided priceless ﬁeld experience for most of the ofﬁcers destined to become leading generals in the forthcoming conﬂ ict, including Captain Robert E. Lee and Lieutenant Ulysses S. Grant. The Military Academy at West Point, founded in 1802, fully justiﬁed its existence through the well-trained ofﬁcers. Useful also was the navy, which did valuable work in throwing a crippling blockade around Mexican ports. A new academy at Annapolis had just been established by Navy Secretary and historian George Bancroft in 1845. The Marine Corps, in existence since 1798, won new laurels and to this day sings in its stirring hymn about the “Halls of Montezuma.” The army waged war without defeat and without a major blunder, despite formidable obstacles and a half-dozen or so achingly long marches. Chagrined British critics, as well as other foreign skeptics, reluctantly revised upward their estimate of Yankee military prowess. Opposing armies, moreover, emerged with increased respect for each other. The Mexicans, though poorly led, fought heroically. At Chapultepec, near Mexico City, the teenage lads of the military academy there (los niños) perished to a boy. Long-memoried Mexicans have never forgotten that their northern enemy tore away about half of their country. The argument that they were lucky not to lose all of it, and that they had been paid something for their land, has scarcely lessened their bitterness. The war also marked an ugly turning point in relations between the United States and Latin America as a whole. Hitherto, Uncle Sam had been regarded with some complacency, even friendliness. Henceforth, he was increasingly feared as the “Colossus of the North.” Suspicious neighbors to the south condemned him as a greedy and untrustworthy bully, who might next despoil them of their soil.

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
TheAfricanThe Great Californios American Migration 
I


 n 1848 the United States, swollen with the spoils of war, reckoned the costs and beneﬁts of the conﬂ ict with Mexico. Thousands of Americans had fallen in battle, and millions of dollars had been invested in a war machine. For this expenditure of blood and money, the nation was repaid with ample land—and with people, the former citizens of Mexico who now became, whether willingly or not, Americans. The largest single addition to American territory in history, the Mexican Cession stretched the United States from sea to shining sea. It secured Texas, brought in vast tracts of the desert Southwest, and included the great prize— the fruited valleys and port cities of Cal i fornia. There, at the conclusion of the Mexican War, dwelled some thirteen thousand Californios—descendants of the Spanish and Mexican conquerors who had once ruled Cal i fornia. The Spanish had ﬁ rst arrived in Cal i fornia in 1769, extending their New World empire and outracing Russian traders to bountiful San Francisco Bay. Father Junipero Serra, an enterprising Franciscan friar, soon

Mission San Gabriel, Founded in 1771




 established twenty-one missions along the coast (see Map 17.4). Indians in the iron grip of the missions were encouraged to adopt Christianity and were often forced to toil endlessly as farmers and herders, in the process suffering disease and degradation. These frequently maltreated mission Indians occupied the lowest rungs on the ladder of Spanish colonial society. Upon the loftiest rungs perched the Californios. Pioneers from the Mexican heartland of New Spain, they had trailed Serra to Cal i fornia, claiming land and civil ofﬁces in their new home. Yet even the proud Californios had deferred to the all-powerful Franciscan missionaries until Mexico threw off the Spanish colonial yoke in 1821, whereupon the infant Mexican government turned an anxious eye toward its frontier outpost. Mexico now emptied its jails to send settlers to the sparsely populated north, built and garrisoned fortresses, and, most important, transferred authority from the missions to secular (that is, governmental) authorities. This “secularization” program attacked and

38°
N


San Rafael
San Francisco


E
S I


San Francisco Solano
 San Francisco de Asís

R
R


San José


A


Santa Clara


Santa Cruz
San Juan Bautista


San Carlos
Borromeo


Soledad


D A
V A
N E


36°
N


Monterey


San Antonio
 de Padua San Miguel

PAC I F IC OCEAN

Mission
Presidio (Fort)


San Luis Obispo


California Indians Dancing at the Mission in San José,
 by Sykes, 1806

 eroded the immense power of the missions and of their Franciscan masters—with their bawling herds of cattle, debased Indian workers, millions of acres of land, and lucrative foreign trade. The frocked friars had commanded their ﬁefdoms so self-conﬁdently that earlier reform efforts had dared to go no further than levying a paltry tax on the missions and politely requesting that the missionaries limit their ﬂoggings of Indians to ﬁ fteen lashes per week. But during the 1830s, the power of the missions weakened, and much of their land and their assets were conﬁscated by the Californios. Vast ranchos (ranches) formed, and from those citadels the Californios ruled in their turn until the Mexican War. The Californios’ glory faded in the wake of the American victory, even though in some isolated places they clung to their political ofﬁces for a decade or two. Overwhelmed by the inrush of Anglo gold-diggers— some eighty-seven thousand after the discovery at Sutter’s Mill in 1848—and undone by the waning of the pastoral economy, the Californios saw their recently acquired lands and their recently established political power slip through their ﬁ ngers. When the Civil War broke out in 1861, so harshly did the word Yankee ring in their ears that many Californios supported the South. By 1870 the Californios’ brief ascendancy had utterly vanished—a short and sad tale of riches to rags in

 La Purísima Concepción 34° N



Santa Ynez


Santa Barbara




 El Camino Réal (Royal Road)

San Buenaventura
San Fernando Rey


60 Km.


San Gabriel


60 Mi.


122°W


N


San Juan Capistrano
San Luis Rey
San Diego de Alcalá
120°W


Map 17.4 Spanish Missions and Presidios
Interactive Map


 the face of the Anglo onslaught. Half a century later, beginning in 1910, hundreds of thousands of young Mexicans would ﬂock into Cal i fornia and the Southwest. They would enter a region liberally endowed with Spanish architecture and artifacts, bearing the names of Spanish missions and Californio ranchos. But they would ﬁ nd it a land dominated by Anglos, a place far different from that which their Californio ancestors had settled so hopefully in earlier days.





Chapter 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 1841–1848


Storming the Fortress of
Chapultepec, Mexico, 1847
 The American success at Chapultepec contributed heavily to the ﬁnal victory over Mexico. One American commander lined up several Irish American deserters on a gallows facing the castle and melodramatically dropped the trapdoors beneath them just as the United States ﬂag was raised over the captured battlement. According to legend, the ﬂag was raised by First Lieutenant George Pickett, later immortalized as the leader of “Pickett’s charge” in the Civil War Battle of Gettysburg, 1863.

 Most ominous of all, the war rearoused the snarling dog of the slavery issue, and the beast did not stop yelping until drowned in the blood of the Civil War. Abolitionists assailed the Mexican conﬂ ict as one provoked by the southern “slavocracy” for its own evil purposes. As James Russell Lowell had Hosea Biglow drawl in his Yankee dialect, They jest want this Californy So’s to lug new slave-states in To abuse ye, an’ to scorn ye, An’ to plunder ye like sin. In line with Lowell’s charge, the bulk of the American volunteers were admittedly from the South and Southwest. But, as in the case of the Texas Revolution, the basic explanation was proximity rather than conspiracy. Quarreling over slavery extension also erupted on the ﬂoors of Congress. In 1846, shortly after the shooting started, Polk had requested an appropriation of $2 million with which to buy a peace. Representative David Wilmot of Pennsylvania, fearful of the southern “slavocracy,” introduced a fateful amendment. It stipulated that slavery should never exist in any of the territory to be wrested from Mexico.

 The disruptive Wilmot amendment twice passed the House, but not the Senate. Southern members, unwilling to be robbed of prospective slave states, fought the restriction tooth and nail. Antislavery men, in Congress and out, battled no less bitterly for the exclusion of slaves. The Wilmot Proviso never became federal law, but it was eventually endorsed by the legislatures of all but one of the free states, and it came to symbolize the burning issue of slavery in the territories. In a broad sense, the opening shots of the Mexican War were the opening shots of the Civil War. President Polk left the nation the splendid physical heritage of Cal i fornia and the Southwest but also the ugly moral heritage of an embittered slavery dispute. “Mexico will poison us,” said the philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson. Even the great champion of the South, John C. Calhoun, had prophetically warned that “Mexico is to us the forbidden fruit . . . the penalty of eating it would be to subject our institutions to political death.” Mexicans could later take some satisfaction in knowing that the territory wrenched from them had proved to be a venomous apple of discord that could well be called Santa Anna’s revenge.

To Learn More




 CHRONOLOGY

 Canadian rebellion and Caroline incident



 Aroostook War breaks out over Maine boundary



 Antislavery Liberty party orga nized



 Harrison dies after four weeks in ofﬁce Tyler assumes presidency





Walker Tariff
 Independent treasury restored United States settles Oregon dispute with Britain United States and Mexico clash over Texas boundary Kearny takes Santa Fe Frémont conquers Cal i fornia Wilmot Proviso passes House of Representatives

 Webster-Ashburton treaty

1846–


Mexican War




 Polk defeats Clay in “Manifest Destiny” election



Battle of Buena Vista
 Scott takes Mexico City



 United States annexes Texas



Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo


KEY TERMS
Tariff of 1842 (397) Caroline (399) Creole (399) Aroostook War (399) Manifest Destiny (403) “Fifty-four forty or ﬁght” (403) Liberty party (404) Walker Tariff (405) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
spot resolutions (408) California Bear Flag Republic (409) Buena Vista, Battle of (409) Guadalupe Hidalgo, Treaty of (410) Conscience Whigs (411) Wilmot Proviso (414) 
John Tyler
James K. Polk
Stephen W. Kearny
 John C. Frémont

 Winﬁeld Scott Nicholas P. Trist David Wilmot

To Learn More
 Iris Engstrand et al., Culture y Cultura: Consequences of the U.S.-Mexican War, 1846–1848 (1998) John Mack Faragher, Sugar Creek: Life on the Illinois Prairie (1986) Sam W. Haynes and Christopher Morris, eds., Manifest Destiny and Empire: American Antebellum Expansionism (1997) Robert W. Johannsen, To the Halls of the Montezumas: The Mexican War in the American Imagination (1985) Theodore J. Karamanski, Fur Trade and Exploration: Opening the Far Northwest, 1821–1852 (1983) James McCaffrey, Army of Manifest Destiny: The American Soldier in the Mexican War (1992) Dale Morgan, ed., Overland in 1846: Diaries and Letters of the California-Oregon Trail (1963)

Martha Sandweiss, Print and Legend: Photography and the
American West (2002)
Michael L. Tate, Indians and Emigrants: Encounters on the
Overland Trails (2006)
 Joseﬁ na Zoraida Vázquez, The United States and Mexico (1985) Richard Bruce Winders, Crisis in the Southwest: The United States, Mexico, and the Struggle over Texas (2002)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

Renewing the
Sectional Struggle





1848–1854
 Secession! Peaceable secession! Sir, your eyes and mine are never destined to see that miracle.

T


 he year 1848, highlighted by a rash of revolutions in Europe, was ﬁ lled with unrest in America. The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo had ofﬁcially ended the war with Mexico, but it had initiated a new and perilous round of political warfare in the United States. The vanquished Mexicans had been forced to relinquish an enormous tract of real estate, including Texas, Cal ifornia, and all the area between. The acquisition of this huge domain raised anew the burning issue of extending slavery into the territories. Northern antislaveryites had rallied behind the Wilmot Proviso, which ﬂatly prohibited slavery in any territory acquired in the Mexican War. Southern senators had blocked the passage of the proviso, but the issue would not die. Ominously, debate over slavery in the area of the Mexican Cession threatened to disrupt the ranks of both Whigs and Democrats and split national politics along NorthSouth sectional lines.

The Popular Sovereignty
Panacea
 Each of the two great political parties was a vital bond of national unity, for each enjoyed powerful support in both North and South. If they should be replaced by two purely sectional groupings, the Union would be in peril. To politicians, the wisest strategy seemed to be to sit on the lid of the slavery issue and ignore the boiling beneath. Even so, the cover bobbed up and down ominously in response to the agitation of zealous northern abolitionists and impassioned southern “ﬁ re-eaters.” Anxious Democrats were forced to seek a new standard-bearer in 1848. President Polk, broken in health by overwork and chronic diarrhea, had pledged himself to a single term. The Democratic National Convention at Baltimore turned to an aging leader,

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



The Election of 1848




 General Lewis Cass, a veteran of the War of 1812. Although a senator and diplomat of wide experience and considerable ability, he was sour-visaged and somewhat pompous. His enemies dubbed him General “Gass” and quickly noted that Cass rhymed with jackass. The Democratic platform, in line with the lid-sitting strategy, was silent on the burning issue of slavery in the territories. But Cass himself had not been silent. His views on the extension of slavery were well known because he was the reputed father of popular sovereignty. This was the doctrine that stated that the sovereign people of a territory, under the general principles of the Constitution, should themselves determine the status of slavery. Popular sovereignty had a persuasive appeal. The public liked it because it accorded with the democratic tradition of self-determination. Politicians liked it because it seemed a comfortable compromise between the free-soilers’ bid for a ban on slavery in the territories and southern demands that Congress protect slavery in the territories. Popular sovereignty tossed the slavery problem into the laps of the people in the various territories. Advocates of the principle thus hoped to dissolve the most stubborn national issue of the day into a series of local issues. Yet popular sovereignty had one fatal defect: it might serve to spread the blight of slavery.

Political Triumphs for
General Taylor
 The Whigs, meeting in Philadelphia, cashed in on the “Taylor fever.” They nominated frank and honest Zachary Taylor, the “Hero of Buena Vista,” who had never held civil ofﬁce or even voted for president. Henry Clay, the living embodiment of Whiggism, should logically have been nominated. But Clay had made too many speeches—and too many enemies. As usual, the Whigs pussyfooted in their platform. Eager to win at any cost, they dodged all troublesome issues and merely extolled the homespun virtues of their candidate. The self-reliant old frontier ﬁghter had not committed himself on the issue of slavery extension. But as a wealthy resident of Louisiana, living on a sugar plantation, he owned scores of slaves. Ardent antislavery men in the North, distrusting both Cass and Taylor, orga nized the Free Soil party. Aroused by the conspiracy of silence in the Democratic and Whig platforms, the Free-Soilers made no bones

General Zachary Taylor (1784–1850) This Democratic
 campaign cartoon of 1848 charges that Taylor’s reputation rested on Mexican skulls.

 about their own stand. They came out foursquare for the Wilmot Proviso and against slavery in the territories. Going beyond other antislavery groups, they broadened their appeal by advocating federal aid for internal improvements and by urging free government homesteads for settlers. The new party assembled a strange assortment of new fellows in the same political bed. It attracted industrialists miffed at Polk’s reduction of protective tariffs. It appealed to Democrats resentful of Polk’s settling for part of Oregon while insisting on all of Texas—a disparity that suggested a menacing southern dominance in the Democratic party. It harbored many northerners whose hatred was directed not so much at slavery as at blacks and who gagged at the prospect of sharing the

