Chapter 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 1861–1865


Fort Sumter, South
Carolina, April 1861
 The interior of Fort Sumter, in Charleston harbor, shortly after the Union’s beleaguered force surrendered and ﬂed. Confederate soldiers pose in front of the fort’s bombarded walls while their ﬂag ﬂies victoriously above them.

 The call for troops, in turn, aroused the South much as the attack on Fort Sumter had aroused the North. Lincoln was now waging war—from the Southern view an aggressive war—on the Confederacy. Virginia, Arkansas, and Tennessee, all of which had earlier voted down secession, reluctantly joined their embattled sister states, as did North Carolina (see Map 20.1). Thus the seven states became eleven as the “submissionists” and “Union shriekers” were overcome. Richmond, Virginia, replaced Montgomery, Alabama, as the Confederate capital—too near Washington for strategic comfort on either side.

 and increase by nearly half its supply of horses and mules. The strategic prize of the Ohio River ﬂowed along the northern border of Kentucky and West Virginia. Two of its navigable tributaries, the Cumberland and Tennessee Rivers, penetrated deep into the heart of Dixie, where much of the Confederacy’s grain, gunpowder, and iron was produced. Small wonder that Lincoln reportedly said he hoped to have God on his side, but he had to have Kentucky. In dealing with the Border States, President Lincoln did not rely solely on moral suasion but successfully used methods of dubious legality. In Maryland he de-

Brothers’ Blood and
Border Blood
 The only slave states left were the crucial Border States. This group consisted of Missouri, Kentucky, Maryland, Delaware, and later West Virginia—the “mountain white” area that somewhat illegally tore itself from the side of Virginia in mid-1861. If the North had ﬁ red the ﬁ rst shot, some or all of these doubtful states probably would have seceded, and the South might well have succeeded. The border group actually contained a white population more than half that of the entire Confederacy. Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri would almost double the manufacturing capacity of the South

 Abraham Lincoln (1809–1865), Kentucky-born like Jefferson Davis, was aware of Kentucky’s crucial importance. In September 1861 he remarked,

“


 I think to lose Kentucky is nearly the same as to lose the whole game. Kentucky gone, we cannot hold Missouri, nor, I think, Maryland. These all against us, and the job on our hands is too large for us. We would as well consent to separation at once, including the surrender of this capital [Washington].

”




The Crucial Border States


90°W


 MINN.

L.


 Seceded after fall of Fort Sumter an L. Michig

IOWA ILLINOIS

N


OHIO MD. W.VA.

N.J.


R.I.
 CONN.

 DEL.

 (1863) VIRGINIA

 MISS.



 LA.



Jan. 9,


SOUTH CAROLINA

 ALABAMA



Jan. 11,


Jan. 26,


Washington, D.C.


 NORTH 10 CAROLINA May 20,1861

June 8,1861




Feb. 1,1861


Apr. 17,1861


 TENNESSEE 11



May 6,




 KENTUCKY

 ARKANSAS

TEX A S 30°N

 e

 IC

INDIAN TERRITORY

 MASS.

N.Y.


 PA.

(1861)


 MISSOURI

(1861)


 IND.

 KANSAS

(1861)


N. MEX. TERR.

 ri L. E

N.H.


 o



GEORGIA
Dec. 20,1860 
 NT

COLORADO TERRITORY

 nt ar i L. O

 MICH.

 LA

40°N


 ro n

Map 20.1 Seceding States
 (with dates and order of secession) Note the long interval—nearly six months— between the secession of South Carolina, the ﬁrst state to go, and that of Tennessee, the last state to leave the Union. These six months were a time of terrible trial for moderate Southerners. When a Georgia statesman pleaded for restraint and negotiations with Washington, he was rebuffed with the cry, “Throw the bloody spear into this den of incendiaries!”

 WIS.

 Order and date of secession

Hu


 Free state or territory

ME. VT.

L.


 Slave state loyal to the Union

70°W


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA ( C A N A DA )

 AN

 Seceded before fall of Fort Sumter

80°W
Superior


 OCE

100°W


 AT

110°W




Jan. 19,


 FLA.



Gulf of Mexico


M EXICO





400 Km.


Jan. 10,
400 Mi.


Interactive Map


 clared martial law where needed and sent in troops, because this state threatened to cut off Washington from the North. Lincoln also deployed Union soldiers in western Virginia and notably in Missouri, where they fought beside Unionists in a local civil war within the larger Civil War. Any ofﬁcial statement of the North’s war aims was profoundly inﬂuenced by the teetering Border States. At the very outset, Lincoln was obliged to declare publicly that he was not ﬁghting to free the blacks. An antislavery declaration would no doubt have driven the Border States into the welcoming arms of the South. An antislavery war was also extremely unpopular in the so-called Butternut region of southern Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. That area had been settled largely by Southerners who had carried their racial prejudices with them when they had crossed the Ohio River (see “Makers of America: Settlers of the Old Northwest,” pp. 260– 261). It was to be a hotbed of pro-Southern sentiment throughout the war. Sensitive to this delicate political calculus, Lincoln insisted repeatedly—even though undercutting his moral high ground—that his paramount purpose was to save the Union at all costs. Thus the war began not as one between slave soil and free

 soil, but one for the Union—with slaveholders on both sides and many proslavery sympathizers in the North. Slavery also colored the character of the war in the West. In Indian Territory (present-day Oklahoma), most of the Five Civilized Tribes—the Cherokees, Creeks, Choctaws, Chickasaws, and Seminoles—sided with the Confederacy. Some of these Indians, notably the Cherokees, owned slaves and thus felt themselves to be making common cause with the slaveowning South. To secure their loyalty, the Confederate government

 Lincoln wrote to the antislavery editor Horace Greeley in August 1862, even as he was about to announce the Emancipation Proclamation,

“


 If I could save the Union without freeing any slave, I would do it; and if I could save it by freeing all the slaves, I would do it; and if I could do it by freeing some and leaving others alone, I would also do that.

”




Chapter 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 1861–1865


 north to ﬁght with the Blue, another south to ﬁght with the Gray. Senator Crittenden of Kentucky, who had fathered the abortive Crittenden Compromise, also had fathered two sons: one became a general in the Union army, the other a general in the Confederate army. Lincoln’s own Kentucky-born wife had four brothers who fought for the Confederacy.

The Balance of Forces


 Friendly Enemies The man on the right is George Armstrong Custer. The youngest general in the Union army, this brilliant young ofﬁcer survived the Civil War only to lose his life and that of every soldier under his command to Sioux warriors at the Battle of the Little Bighorn in 1876—“Custer’s Last Stand.” The man on the left is a Southern soldier and prisoner of war. He and Custer had been classmates at West Point.

 agreed to take over federal payments to the tribes and invited the Native Americans to send delegates to the Confederate congress. In return the tribes supplied troops to the Confederate army. Meanwhile, a rival faction of Cherokees and most of the Plains Indians sided with the Union, only to be rewarded after the war with a relentless military campaign to herd them onto reservations or into oblivion. Unhappily, the conﬂ ict between “Billy Yank” and “Johnny Reb” was a brothers’ war (see “Makers of America: Billy Yank and Johnny Reb,” pp. 468–469). There were many Northern volunteers from the Southern states and many Southern volunteers from the Northern states. The “mountain whites” of the South sent north some 50,000 men, and the loyal slave states contributed some 300,000 soldiers to the Union. In many a family of the Border States, one brother rode

 When war broke out, the South seemed to have great advantages. The Confederacy could ﬁght defensively behind interior lines. The North had to invade the vast territory of the Confederacy, conquer it, and drag it bodily back into the Union. In fact, the South did not have to win the war in order to win its independence. If it merely fought the invaders to a draw and stood ﬁ rm, Confederate independence would be won. Fighting on their own soil for self-determination and preservation of their way of life, Southerners at ﬁ rst enjoyed an advantage in morale as well. Militarily, the South from the opening volleys of the war had the most talented ofﬁcers. Most conspicuous among a dozen or so ﬁ rst-rate commanders was gray-haired General Robert E. Lee, whose knightly bearing and chivalric sense of honor embodied the Southern ideal. Lincoln had unofﬁcially offered him command of the Northern armies, but when Virginia seceded, Lee felt honor-bound to go with his native state. Lee’s chief lieutenant for much of the war was black-bearded Thomas J. (“Stonewall”) Jackson, a gifted tactical theorist and a master of speed and deception. Besides their brilliant leaders, ordinary Southerners were also bred to ﬁght. Accustomed to managing horses and bearing arms from boyhood, they made excellent cavalrymen and foot soldiers. Their highpitched “rebel yell” (“yeeeahhh”) was designed to strike terror into the hearts of fuzz-chinned Yankee recruits. “There is nothing like it on this side of the infernal region,” one Northern soldier declared. “The peculiar corkscrew sensation that it sends down your backbone can never be told. You have to feel it.” As one immense farm, the South seemed to be handicapped by the scarcity of factories. Yet by seizing federal weapons, running Union blockades, and developing their own ironworks, Southerners managed to obtain sufﬁcient weaponry. “Yankee ingenuity” was not conﬁ ned to Yankees. Nevertheless, as the war dragged on, grave shortages of shoes, uniforms, and blankets disabled the

The Confederate Balance Sheet




 The Technology of War One of the new machines of destruction that made the Civil War the ﬁrst mechanized war, this eight-and-a-half ton federal mortar sat on a railroad ﬂatcar in Petersburg, Virginia, ready to hurl two-hundred-pound missiles as far as two and a half miles. This powerful artillery piece rode on the tracks of a captured Southern railroad—itself another artifact of modern technology that ﬁgured heavily in the war. Of the 31,256 miles of railroad track in the United States in 1861, less than 30 percent, or 9,283 miles, were in the Confederate states, soon reduced by Union capture and destruction to 6,000 miles. The Confederate government’s failure to understand the military importance of railroads contributed substantially to its defeat.

 South. Even with immense stores of food on Southern farms, civilians and soldiers often went hungry because of supply problems. “Forward, men! They have cheese in their haversacks,” cried one Southern ofﬁcer as he attacked the Yankees. Much of the hunger was caused by a breakdown of the South’s rickety transportation system, especially where the railroad tracks were cut or destroyed by the Yankee invaders. The economy was the greatest Southern weakness; it was the North’s greatest strength. The North was not only a huge farm but a sprawling factory as well (see

 Table 20.1). Yankees boasted about three-fourths of the nation’s wealth, including three-fourths of the thirty thousand miles of railroads. The North also controlled the sea. With its vastly superior navy, it established a blockade that, though a sieve at ﬁ rst, soon choked off Southern supplies and eventually shattered Southern morale. Its sea power also enabled the North to exchange huge quantities of grain for munitions and supplies from Europe, thus adding the output from the factories of Europe to its own.

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
Yank TheBilly Great Africanand Johnny Reb American Migration 
T


 he Prussian general Helmuth von Moltke (1800– 1891) allegedly remarked that the American Civil War was merely a contest waged by “armed mobs.” Whether he meant it or not, the Prussian’s famous insult actually contains an important insight. Unlike the professional standing armies of nineteenth-century Europe, the Civil War armies were overwhelmingly amateur and volunteer. Taken from all walks of life, citizen-soldiers gave the Civil War drama its uniquely plebeian cast. With 2 million men in Union blue and 1 million men in Confederate gray, Civil War soldiers represented a vast cross section of American society. (At nearly 10 percent of the 1860 population, the same rate of mobilization would amount to more than 27 million troops today.) Most soldiers had been farmers or farm laborers. Poor unskilled workers, despite vehement antidraft rhetoric to the contrary, were actually underrepresented. Most troops were native-born, but immigrants did serve in rough proportion to their presence in the general population. Black ﬁghting men accounted for about 10 percent of Union enlistments by war’s end (see “Blacks Battle Bondage,” pp. 490–492). Perhaps onethird of the soldiers were married. Nearly 40 percent were under twenty-two years of age at the time of enlistment.

A
Union Private 



 Inheritors of the values of Jacksonian mass democracy and Victorian sentiments, Civil War citizen-soldiers brought strong ideological commitments to the struggle. Neither army regulars nor reluctant conscripts, these men fought in the name of country, duty, honor, manhood, and righteousness. Though enemies, Union and Confederate soldiers shared a common commitment to the patriotic “spirit of ’76” and the cause of liberty, independence, and republican government. A man’s moral obligation to defend his country and preserve his personal reputation provided added motivation. Many interpreted the war as a religious crusade. In short, convictions, not coercion, created Civil War armies. Despite their similarities, “Billy Yank” (the ordinary Union soldier) and “Johnny Reb” (the typical Confederate) were not necessarily cut from the same cloth. Both armies reﬂected the societies from which they came. Billy Yank tended to be more literate, intellectual, practical, and efﬁcient, while Johnny Reb was often more jocular, emotional, religious, and personally concerned about the war. Defense of home and hearth meant more to Confederate troops, for the simple reason that most of the ﬁghting occurred on Southern soil. Above all else, the men in gray maintained a distinctive rural individualism and homegrown disrespect for authority. Their counterparts in blue, often familiar with the strict regimen of Northern cities and factories, adapted more quickly to army discipline. One aspect of soldiering Johnny Reb and Billy Yank shared was the dull routine of camp life. For all its promises of adventure, the life of a Civil War soldier could be downright boring and unpleasant. Men spent ﬁ fty days in camp for every one in battle. Reveille, roll call, and drill were daily chores. A soldier’s ﬁ rst concern was usually his stomach, even when pork (“sowbelly”), beef (“salt horse”), coffee, and bread (or its unwelcome substitute, “hardtack”) were in abundance. Food shortages plagued both armies, especially the Confederates as the war progressed. Uniforms deteriorated from “ﬁ nery” to “tatters,” as did moral standards. Gambling, drinking, stealing, swearing, and Sabbath-breaking proliferated; even widespread religious revivals could not keep up. The gravest hardship of all, however, was disease. Germs—especially camp and campaign maladies like dysentery, diarrhea, typhoid, and malaria—took twice

A
Confederate Soldier 

 as many lives as bullets. By modern standards the mortality rates of wounded soldiers were appallingly high. (World War II marked the ﬁ rst time in American warfare that more soldiers died from combat wounds than from sickness and disease.) Without proper medical understanding of sterilization or sanitation, the risk of sepsis (bacterial infection) accompanied every wound. Head, chest, and stomach wounds were usually considered fatal; arm and leg injuries often resulted in amputation. Only the presence of nurses made life in ﬁeld hospitals tolerable. Overcoming the vocal hostility of male army doctors and the ﬁ lth, stench, and agony of these hospitals, some twenty thousand women volunteered as nurses during the war. Working with the maimed and the dying was never pleasant, but female

 nurses earned the respect of countless wounded soldiers for their dedicated ser vice. Yet for all its brutality, not even the ﬁeld hospital could match the traumatic experience of combat. Tension mounted in the ﬁ nal moments before battle, as ofﬁcers strove to maintain close-order ranks in the face of harrowing enemy gunﬁ re. Artillery shells blanketed the battleﬁeld with a smoky haze. Bullets zinged through the air like a driv ing rain. Once soldiers joined the action, a rush of adrenaline could transform frightened civilians into frenzied and ferocious ﬁghters. First-timers likened the experience to “seeing the elephant” (an antebellum expression of awe). One sight of mangled limbs or one whiff of decaying ﬂesh was often enough to push men over the edge. “Even when I sleep,” a Massachusetts soldier moaned, “I hear the whistling of the shells and the shouts and groans, and to sum it up in two [sic] words it is horrible.” Given the extraordinary stress of battle, many men avoided combat as much as they could. Shell-shocked and weary, most soldiers returned home from the war utterly transformed. For nearly a decade and a half, silence reigned, as veterans and civilians entered into a tacit agreement to put the ordeal behind them. By 1880 interest revived in the war, and a new battle over its proper meaning commenced. Ignoring the conﬂ ict’s original signiﬁcance as a moral victory for slave emancipation, many Americans embraced a new reconciliationist and white supremacist script. In the interest of sectional harmony and national prosperity, Northerners abandoned earlier commitments to black rights. A reunion of sections spelled a division of races. Casting aside their original ideological convictions, many Americans came to regard the conﬂ ict as a tragic brothers’ war meaningful only for its show of martial valor. Principles that had compelled 3 million men to enlist and caused 620,000 to die were largely forgotten. Instead a sentimental, sanitized, and whitened version of the Civil War became commonplace by the late nineteenth century. Von Moltke’s “armed mobs” came to be remembered as the noblest of knights.

 Leg Amputation on the Battleﬁelds of Virginia A surgeon wearing a hat and a sword amputates the leg of a wounded soldier, while an anesthetist (facing the camera) holds a sponge dipped in chloroform over the patient’s nose. A surgical assistant ties a tourniquet to stem the ﬂow of blood. Other soldiers, dressed in Zouave uniforms modeled on North African designs, which were popular among some Northern and Southern regiments, watch closely, likely aware of the dangers accompanying such crude surgery. An estimated 30 percent of amputees died from postoperative complications, most often infections.



Chapter 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 1861–1865


Table 20.1 Manufacturing by Sections, 1860
Section
 New Eng land Middle states Western states Southern states Paciﬁc states Territories total

Number of
Establishments


Capital Invested


Average Number
 of Laborers

Annual Value
 of Products

20,671
53,387
36,785
20,631
8,777
140,533


$ 257,477,783
435,061,964
194,212,543
95,975,185
23,380,334
3,747,906
$1,009,855,715


391,836
546,243
209,909
110,721
50,204
2,333
1,311,246


$ 468,599,287
802,338,392
384,606,530
155,531,281
71,229,989
3,556,197
$1,885,861,676


Recruiting Immigrants for the Union Army
 This poster in several languages appeals to immigrants to enlist. Immigrant manpower provided the Union with both industrial and military muscle.

Percentage of
Total Value
24.8%
42.5
20.4
8.3
3.8
0.2


 The Union also enjoyed a much larger reserve of manpower. The loyal states had a population of some 22 million; the seceding states had 9 million people, including about 3.5 million slaves. Adding to the North’s overwhelming supply of soldiery were ever-more immigrants from Europe, who continued to pour into the North even during the war (see Table 20.2). Over 800,000 newcomers arrived between 1861 and 1865, most of them British, Irish, and German. Large numbers of them were induced to enlist in the Union army. Altogether about one-ﬁ fth of the Union forces were foreignborn, and in some units military commands were given in four different languages. Whether immigrant or native, ordinary Northern boys were much less prepared than their Southern counterparts for military life. Yet the Northern “clodhoppers” and “shopkeepers” eventually adjusted themselves to soldiering and became known for their discipline and determination. The North was much less fortunate in its higher commanders. Lincoln was forced to use a costly trialand-error method to sort out effective leaders from the many incompetent political ofﬁcers, until he ﬁ nally uncovered a general, Ulysses Simpson Grant, who was determined to slog his way to victory at whatever cost in life and limb. In the long run, as the Northern strengths were brought to bear, they outweighed those of the South. But when the war began, the chances for Southern independence were unusually favorable—certainly better than the prospects for success of the thirteen colonies in 1776. The turn of a few events could easily have produced a different outcome. The might-have-beens are fascinating. If the Border States had seceded, if the uncertain states of the upper Mississippi Valley had turned against the Union,

The Threat of European Intervention




Table 20.2 Immigration to United States, 1860–1866
Year


Total


Britain


Ireland


Germany


All Others


1865*


153,640
91,918
91,985
176,282
193,418
248,120
318,568


29,737
19,675
24,639
66,882
53,428
82,465
94,924


48,637
23,797
23,351
55,916
63,523
29,772
36,690


54,491
31,661
27,529
33,162
57,276
83,424
115,892


20,775
16,785
16,466
20,322
19,191
52,459
71,062


 *Only the ﬁ rst three months of 1865 were war months.

 if a wave of Northern defeatism had demanded an armistice, and if Britain and/or France had broken the Union’s naval blockade of Southern ports, the South might well have won. All of these possibilities almost became realities, but none of them actually occurred, and lacking their impetus, the South could not hope to win.

Dethroning King Cotton
 Successful revolutions, including the American Revolution of 1776, have generally succeeded because of foreign intervention. The South counted on it, did not get it, and lost. Of all the Confederacy’s potential assets, none counted more weightily than the prospect of foreign intervention. Europe’s ruling classes were openly sympathetic to the Confederate cause. They had long abhorred the incendiary example of the American democratic experiment, and they cherished a kind of fellow-feeling for the South’s semifeudal, aristocratic social order. In contrast, the masses of working people in Britain, and to some extent in France, were pulling and praying for the North. Many of them had read Uncle Tom’s Cabin, and they sensed that the war—though at the outset ofﬁcially fought only over the question of union—might extinguish slavery if the North emerged victorious. The common folk of Britain could not yet cast the ballot, but they could cast the brick. Their certain hostility to any ofﬁcial intervention on behalf of the South evidently had a sobering effect on the British government. Thus the dead hands of Uncle Tom helped Uncle Sam by restraining the British and French ironclads from piercing the Union blockade. Yet the fact re-

 mained that British textile mills depended on the American South for 75 percent of their cotton supplies. Wouldn’t silent looms force London to speak? Humanitarian sympathies aside, Southerners counted on hard economic need to bring Britain to their aid. Why did King Cotton fail them? He failed in part because he had been so lavishly productive in the immediate prewar years of 1857– 1860. Enormous exports of cotton in those years had piled up surpluses in British warehouses. When the shooting started in 1861, British manufacturers had on hand a hefty oversupply of ﬁber. The real pinch did not come until about a year and a half later, when thousands of hungry operatives were thrown out of work. But by this time Lincoln had announced his slaveemancipation policy, and the “wage slaves” of Britain were not going to demand a war to defend the slaveowners of the South.

 The American minister to Britain wrote,

“


 The great body of the aristocracy and the commercial classes are anxious to see the United States go to pieces [but] the middle and lower class sympathise with us [because they] see in the convulsion in America an era in the history of the world, out of which must come in the end a general recognition of the right of mankind to the produce of their labor and the pursuit of happiness.

”




Chapter 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 1861–1865


 The direst effects of the “cotton famine” in Britain were relieved in several ways. Hunger among unemployed workers was partially eased when certain kindhearted Americans sent over several cargoes of foodstuffs. As Union armies penetrated the South, they captured or bought considerable supplies of cotton and shipped them to Britain; the Confederates also ran a limited quantity through the blockade. In addition, the cotton growers of Egypt and India, responding to high prices, increased their output and captured a share of the world cotton market that they held on to well after the war’s conclusion. Finally, booming war industries in Eng land, which supplied both the North and the South, relieved unemployment. King Wheat and King Corn—the monarchs of Northern agriculture—proved to be more potent potentates than King Cotton. During these war years, the

 As the Civil War neared the end of its third year, the London Times (January 7, 1864) could boast,

“


 We are as busy, as rich, and as fortunate in our trade as if the American war had never broken out, and our trade with the States had never been disturbed. Cotton was no King, notwithstanding the prerogatives which had been loudly claimed for him.

”


 North, blessed with ideal weather, produced bountiful crops of grain and harvested them with McCormick’s mechanical reaper. In the same period, the British suffered a series of bad harvests. They were forced to import huge quantities of grain from America, which happened to have the cheapest and most abundant supply. If the British had broken the blockade to gain cotton, they would have provoked the North to war and would have lost this precious granary. Unemployment for some seemed better than hunger for all. Hence one Yankee journal could exult, Wave the stars and stripes high o’er us, Let every freeman sing . . . Old King Cotton’s dead and buried; brave young Corn is King.

The Decisiveness
 of Diplomacy

 The Pending Conﬂict, 1863 Great Britain and France look on while the Americans struggle. Despite repeated pleas from Confederate diplomats for recognition and aid, both France and Britain refrained from intervening in the American conﬂict—not least because of the Union’s demonstrated strength on the battleﬁeld and its economic importance to European importers.

 America’s diplomatic front has seldom been so critical as during the Civil War. The South never wholly abandoned its dream of foreign intervention, and Europe’s rulers schemed to take advantage of America’s distress. The ﬁ rst major crisis with Britain came over the Trent affair, late in 1861. A Union warship cruising on the high seas north of Cuba stopped a British mail steamer, the Trent, and forcibly removed two Confederate diplomats bound for Europe. Britons were outraged: upstart Yankees could not so boldly offend the Mistress of the Seas. War preparations buzzed, and red-coated troops embarked for Canada, with bands blaring “I Wish I Was in Dixie.” The London Foreign Ofﬁce prepared an ultimatum demanding surrender of the prisoners and an apology. But luckily, slow communications gave passions on both sides a chance to cool. Lincoln came to see the

Diplomatic Crises




 while an angered North had to divert naval strength from its blockade for wild-goose chases. The barnacled Alabama ﬁ nally accepted a challenge from a stronger Union cruiser off the coast of France in 1864 and was quickly destroyed. The Alabama was beneath the waves, but the issue of British-built Confederate raiders stayed aﬂoat. Under prodding by the American minister, Charles Francis Adams, the British gradually perceived that allowing such ships to be built was a dangerous precedent that might someday be used against them. In 1863 London openly violated its own leaky laws and seized another raider being built for the South. But despite greater ofﬁcial efforts by Britain to remain truly neutral, Confederate commerce-destroyers, chieﬂy British-built, captured more than 250 Yankee ships, severely crippling the American merchant marine, which never fully recovered. Glowering Northerners looked farther north and talked openly of securing revenge by grabbing Canada when the war was over.

Battle of the USS Kearsarge and the CSS Alabama
 off the Normandy Coast, 1864, by Edouard Manet The Alabama sank sixty-four Union ships before it was destroyed off the coast of Cherbourg, France, in 1864. The Kearsarge rescued most of the Alabama’s crew from their sinking vessel, but Confederate captain Raphael Semmes managed to escape aboard an English yacht that had been observing the sea battle.

 Trent prisoners as “white elephants” and reluctantly released them. “One war at a time,” he reportedly said. Another major crisis in Anglo-American relations arose over the unneutral building in Britain of Confederate commerce-raiders, notably the Alabama. These vessels were not warships within the meaning of loopholed British law because they left their shipyards unarmed and picked up their guns elsewhere. The Alabama escaped in 1862 to the Portuguese Azores, and there took on weapons and a crew from two British ships that followed it. Although ﬂying the Confederate ﬂag and ofﬁcered by Confederates, it was manned by Britons and never entered a Confederate port. Britain was thus the chief naval base of the Confederacy. The Alabama lighted the skies from Europe to the Far East with the burning hulks of Yankee merchantmen. All told, this “British pirate” captured over sixty vessels. Competing British shippers were delighted,

 Foreign Flare-ups A ﬁ nal Anglo-American crisis was touched off in 1863 by the Laird rams—two Confederate warships being constructed in the shipyard of John Laird and Sons in Great Britain. Designed to destroy the wooden ships of the Union navy with their iron rams and large-caliber guns, they were far more dangerous than the swift but lightly armed Alabama. If delivered to the South, they probably would have sunk the blockading squadrons and then brought Northern cities under their ﬁ re. In retaliation the North doubtless would have invaded Canada, and a full-dress war with Britain would have erupted. But Minister Adams took a hard line, warning that “this is war” if the rams were released. At the last minute, the London government relented and bought the two ships for the Royal Navy. Everyone seemed satisﬁed—except the disappointed Confederates. Britain also eventually repented its sorry role in the Alabama business. It agreed in 1871 to submit the Alabama dispute to arbitration, and in 1872 paid American claimants $15.5 million for damages caused by wartime commerce-raiders. American rancor was also directed at Canada, where despite the vigilance of British authorities, Southern agents plotted to burn Northern cities. One Confederate raid into Vermont left three banks plundered and one American citizen dead. Hatred of Eng land burned especially ﬁercely among Irish Americans, and they



Chapter 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 1861–1865


 unleashed their fury on Canada. They raised several tiny “armies” of a few hundred green-shirted men and launched invasions of Canada, notably in 1866 and 1870. The Canadians condemned the Washington government for permitting such violations of neutrality, but the administration was hampered by the presence of so many Irish American voters. As fate would have it, two great nations emerged from the ﬁery furnace of the American Civil War. One was a reunited United States, and the other was a united Canada. The British Parliament established the Dominion of Canada in 1867. It was partly designed to bolster the Canadians, both politically and spiritually, against the possible vengeance of the United States. Emperor Napoleon III of France, taking advantage of America’s preoccupation with its own internal problems, dispatched a French army to occupy Mexico City in 1863. The following year he installed on the ruins of the crushed republic his puppet, Austrian archduke Maximilian, as emperor of Mexico. Both sending the army and enthroning Maximilian were ﬂagrant violations of the Monroe Doctrine. Napoleon was gambling that the Union would collapse and thus America would be too weak to enforce its “hands-off” policy in the Western Hemisphere. The North, as long as it was convulsed by war, pursued a walk-on-eggs policy toward France. The Washington government gave aid to the resistance movement headed by Mexico’s beloved national hero (and the ﬁ rst full-blooded Indian president of Mexico) Benito Juárez. But when the shooting stopped in 1865, Secretary of State Seward, speaking with the authority of nearly a million war-tempered bayonets, prepared to march south. Napoleon realized that his costly gamble was doomed. He reluctantly took “French leave” of his illstarred puppet in 1867, and Maximilian soon crumpled ingloriously before a Mexican ﬁring squad.

President Davis Versus
President Lincoln
 The Confederate government, like King Cotton, harbored fatal weaknesses. Its constitution, borrowing liberally from that of the Union, contained one deadly defect. Created by secession, it could not logically deny future secession to its constituent states. President Davis, while making his bow to states’ rights, had in view a well-knit central government. But determined states’ rights supporters fought him bitterly to the end. The Richmond regime encountered difﬁculty even in per-

 Lincoln at Antietam (also known as Sharpsburg), October 1862 Deeply committed to his responsibilities as commander in chief, President Lincoln visited Union forces on the battleﬁeld several times during the war. With him here at Antietam are the detective Allan Pinkerton (on the left), who provided intelligence to the Union army, and General John McClernand, who often accompanied the president on his travels (see pp. 487–488).

 suading certain state troops to serve outside their own borders. The governor of Georgia, a belligerent states’ righter, at times seemed ready to secede from the secession and ﬁght both sides. States’ rights were no less damaging to the Confederacy than Yankee ﬁ repower. Sharp-featured Jefferson Davis—tense, humorless, legalistic, and stubborn—was repeatedly in hot water. Although an eloquent orator and an able administrator, he at no time enjoyed real personal popularity and was often at loggerheads with his congress. At times there was serious talk of impeachment. Unlike Lincoln, Davis was somewhat imperious and inclined to defy rather than lead public opinion. Suffering acutely from neuralgia and other ner vous disorders (including a tic), he overworked himself with the details of both civil government and military operations. No one could

 Lincoln's Wartime Powers

 doubt his courage, sincerity, integrity, and devotion to the South, but the task proved beyond his powers. It was probably beyond the powers of any mere mortal. Lincoln also had his troubles, but on the whole they were less prostrating. The North enjoyed the prestige of a long-established government, ﬁ nancially stable and fully recognized both at home and abroad. Lincoln, the inexperienced prairie politician, proved superior to the more experienced but less ﬂexible Davis. Able to relax with droll stories at critical times, “Old Abe” grew as the war dragged on. Tactful, quiet, patient, yet ﬁ rm, he developed a genius for interpreting and leading a ﬁckle public opinion. Holding aloft the banner of Union with inspiring utterances, he demonstrated charitableness toward the South and forbearance toward backbiting colleagues. “Did [Secretary of War Edwin] Stanton say I was a damned fool?” he reportedly replied to a talebearer. “Then I dare say I must be one, for Stanton is generally right and he always says what he means.”

Limitations on Wartime
Liberties
 “Honest Abe” Lincoln, when inaugurated, laid his hand on the Bible and swore a solemn oath to uphold the Constitution. Then, feeling driven by necessity, he proceeded to tear a few holes in that hallowed document. He understandably concluded that if he did not do so, and patch the parchment later, there might not be a Constitution of a united United States to mend. The “rail-splitter” was no hairsplitter. But such infractions were not, in general, sweeping. Congress, as is often true in times of crisis, generally accepted or conﬁ rmed the president’s questionable acts. Lincoln, though accused of being a “Simple Susan Tyrant,” did not believe that his ironhanded authority would continue once the Union was preserved. As he pointedly remarked in 1863, a man suffering from “temporary illness” would not persist in feeding on bitter medicines for “the remainder of his healthful life.” Congress was not in session when war erupted, so Lincoln gathered the reins into his own hands. Brushing aside legal objections, he boldly proclaimed a blockade. (His action was later upheld by the Supreme Court.) He arbitrarily increased the size of the Federal army— something that only Congress can do under the Constitution (see Art. I, Sec. VIII, para. 12). (Congress later approved.) He directed the secretary of the Treasury to advance $2 million without appropriation or security to three private citizens for military purposes—a grave



 irregularity contrary to the Constitution (see Art. I, Sec. IX, para. 7). He suspended the precious privilege of the writ of habeas corpus, so that anti-Unionists might be summarily arrested. In taking this step, he deﬁed a dubious ruling by the chief justice that the safeguards of habeas corpus could be set aside only by the authorization of Congress (see Art. I, Sec. IX, para. 2). Lincoln’s regime was guilty of many other highhanded acts. For example, it arranged for “supervised” voting in the Border States. There the intimidated citizen, holding a colored ballot indicating his party preference, had to march between two lines of armed troops. The federal ofﬁcials also ordered the suspension of certain newspapers and the arrest of their editors on grounds of obstructing the war. Jefferson Davis was less able than Lincoln to exercise arbitrary power, mainly because of conﬁ rmed states’ righters who fanned an intense spirit of localism. To the very end of the conﬂ ict, the owners of horsedrawn vans in Petersburg, Virginia, prevented the sensible joining of the incoming and outgoing tracks of a militarily vital railroad. The South seemed willing to lose the war before it would surrender local rights—and it did.

Volunteers and Draftees:
North and South
 Ravenous, the gods of war demanded men—lots of men. Northern armies were at ﬁ rst manned solely by volunteers, with each state assigned a quota based on population. But in 1863, after volunteering had slackened, Congress passed a federal conscription law for the ﬁ rst time on a nationwide scale in the United States. The provisions were grossly unfair to the poor. Rich boys, including young John D. Rockefeller, could hire substitutes to go in their places or purchase exemption outright by paying $300. “Three-hundred-dollar men” was the scornful epithet applied to these slackers. Draftees who did not have the necessary cash complained that their banditlike government demanded “three hundred dollars or your life.” The draft was especially damned in the Democratic strongholds of the North, notably in New York City. A frightful riot broke out in 1863, touched off largely by underprivileged and antiblack Irish Americans, who shouted, “Down with Lincoln!” and “Down with the draft!” For several days the New York draft riots put the city at the mercy of a rampaging, pillaging mob. Scores of lives were lost, and the victims included many



Chapter 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 1861–1865


Table 20.3 Number of Men in Uniform at
Date Given


The New York City Anti-Draft Rioters, 1863
 Mostly Irish American mobs convulsed the city for days and were in the end put down only by a merciless application of Federal ﬁrepower.

 lynched blacks. Elsewhere in the North, conscription met with resentment and an occasional minor riot. More than 90 percent of the Union troops were volunteers, since social and patriotic pressures to enlist were strong. As able-bodied men became scarcer, generous bounties for enlistment were offered by federal, state, and local authorities. An enterprising and moneywise volunteer might legitimately pocket more than $1,000. With money ﬂowing so freely, an unsavory crew of “bounty brokers” and “substitute brokers” sprang up, at home and abroad. They combed the poorhouses of the British Isles and western Europe, and many an Irishman or German was befuddled with whiskey and induced to enlist. A number of the slippery “bounty boys” deserted, volunteered elsewhere, and netted another handsome haul. The records reveal that one “bounty jumper” repeated his proﬁtable operation thirty-two times. But desertion was by no means conﬁ ned to “bounty jumpers.” The rolls of the Union army recorded about 200,000 deserters of all classes, and the Confederate authorities were plagued with a runaway problem of similar dimensions.

Date


Union


Confederate


July 1861
January 1862
March 1862
January 1863
January 1864
January 1865


186,751
575,917
637,126
918,121
860,737
959,460


112,040
351,418
401,395
446,622
481,180
445,203


 Like the North, the South at ﬁ rst relied mainly on volunteers. But since the Confederacy was much less populous, it scraped the bottom of its manpower barrel much more quickly (see Table 20.3). Quipsters observed that any man who could see lightning and hear thunder was judged ﬁt for ser vice. The Richmond regime, robbing both “cradle and grave” (ages seventeen to ﬁ fty), was forced to resort to conscription as early as April 1862, nearly a year earlier than the Union. Confederate draft regulations also worked serious injustices. As in the North, a rich man could hire a substitute or purchase exemption. Slaveowners or overseers with twenty slaves might also claim exemption. These special privileges, later modiﬁed, made for bad feelings among the less prosperous, many of whom complained that this was “a rich man’s war but a poor man’s ﬁght.” Why sacriﬁce one’s life to save an afﬂuent neighbor’s slaves? No large-scale draft riots broke out in the South, as in New York City. But the Confederate conscription agents often found it prudent to avoid those areas inhabited by sharpshooting mountain whites, who were branded “Tories,” “traitors,” and “Yankee-lovers.”

The Economic Stresses of War
 Blessed with a lion’s share of the wealth, the North rode through the ﬁ nancial breakers much more smoothly than the South. Excise taxes on tobacco and alcohol were substantially increased by Congress. An income tax was levied for the ﬁ rst time in the nation’s experience, and although the rates were painlessly low by later standards, they netted millions of dollars. Customs receipts likewise proved to be important revenue-raisers. Early in 1861, after enough antiprotection Southern members had seceded, Congress passed the Morrill Tariff Act, superseding the low Tariff of

Rival Economies


 1857. It increased the existing duties some 5 to 10 percent, boosting them to about the moderate level of the Walker Tariff of 1846. But these modest rates were soon pushed sharply upward by the necessities of war. The increases were designed partly to raise additional revenue and partly to provide more protection for the prosperous manufacturers who were being plucked by the new internal taxes. A protective tariff thus became identiﬁed with the Republican party, as American industrialists, mostly Republicans, waxed fat on these welcome beneﬁts. The Washington Treasury also issued greenbacked paper money, totaling nearly $450 million, at face value. This printing-press currency was inadequately supported by gold, and hence its value was determined by the nation’s credit. Greenbacks thus ﬂuctuated with the fortunes of Union arms and at one low point were worth only 39 cents on the gold dollar. The holders of the notes, victims of creeping inﬂation, were indirectly taxed as the value of the currency slowly withered in their hands. Yet borrowing far outstripped both greenbacks and taxes as a money-raiser. The federal Treasury netted $2,621,916,786 through the sale of bonds, which bore interest and which were payable at a later date. The modern technique of selling these issues to the people directly through “drives” and payroll deductions had not yet been devised. Accordingly, the Treasury was forced to market its bonds through the private banking house of Jay Cooke and Company, which received a commission of three-eighths of 1 percent on all sales. With both proﬁts and patriotism at stake, the bankers succeeded in making effective appeals to citizen purchasers. A ﬁnancial landmark of the war was the National Banking System, authorized by Congress in 1863. Launched partly as a stimulant to the sale of government bonds, it was also designed to establish a standard bank-note currency. (The country was then ﬂooded with depreciated “rag money” issued by unreliable bankers.) Banks that joined the National Banking System could buy government bonds and issue sound paper money backed by them. The war-born National Banking Act thus turned out to be the ﬁ rst signiﬁcant step taken toward a uniﬁed banking network since 1836, when the “monster” Bank of the United States was killed by Andrew Jackson. Spawned by the war, this new system continued to function for ﬁ fty years, until replaced by the Federal Reserve System in 1913. An impoverished South was beset by different ﬁnancial woes. Customs duties were choked off as the coils



 A contemporary (October 22, 1863) Richmond diary portrays the ruinous effects of inﬂation:

“


 A poor woman yesterday applied to a merchant in Carey Street to purchase a barrel of ﬂour. The price he demanded was $70. ‘My God!’ exclaimed she, ‘how can I pay such prices? I have seven children; what shall I do?’ ‘I don’t know, madam,’ said he coolly, ‘unless you eat your children.’

”


 of the Union blockade tightened. Large issues of Confederate bonds were sold at home and abroad, amounting to nearly $400 million. The Richmond regime also increased taxes sharply and imposed a 10 percent levy on farm produce. But in general the states’ rights Southerners were immovably opposed to heavy direct taxation by the central authority: only about 1 percent of the total income was raised in this way. As revenue began to dry up, the Confederate government was forced to print blue-backed paper money with complete abandon. “Runaway inﬂation” occurred as Southern presses continued to grind out the poorly backed treasury notes, totaling in all more than $1 billion. The Confederate paper dollar ﬁ nally sank to the point where it was worth only 1.6 cents when Lee surrendered. Overall, the war inﬂ icted a 9,000 percent inﬂation rate on the Confederacy, contrasted with 80 percent for the Union.

 The North’s Economic Boom Wartime prosperity in the North was little short of miraculous. The marvel is that a divided nation could ﬁght a costly conﬂ ict for four long years and then emerge seemingly more prosperous than ever before. New factories, sheltered by the friendly umbrella of the new protective tariffs, mushroomed forth. Soaring prices, resulting from inﬂation, unfortunately pinched the day laborer and the white-collar worker to some extent. But the manufacturers and businesspeople raked in “the fortunes of war.” The Civil War bred a millionaire class for the ﬁ rst time in American history, though a few individuals of extreme wealth could have been found earlier. Many of these newly rich were noisy, gaudy, brassy, and given to extravagant living. Their emergence merely illustrates



Chapter 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 1861–1865


Booth at the Sanitary Fair in Chicago,
1863 The Chicago Sanitary Fair was the
 ﬁrst of many such fairs throughout the nation to raise funds for soldier relief efforts. Mainly organized by women, the fair sold captured Confederate ﬂags, battle relics, handicrafts like these potholders (right), and donated items, including President Lincoln’s original draft of the Emancipation Proclamation (which garnered $3,000 in auction). When the fair closed, the Chicago headquarters of the U.S. Sanitary Commission had raised $100,000, and its female managers had gained organizational experience that many would put to work in the postwar movement for women’s rights.

 the truth that some gluttony and greed always mar the devotion and self-sacriﬁce called forth by war. The story of speculators and peculators was roughly the same in both camps. But graft was more ﬂagrant in the North than in the South, partly because there was more to steal. Yankee “sharpness” appeared at its worst. Dishonest agents, putting proﬁts above patriotism, palmed off aged and blind horses on government purchasers. Unscrupulous Northern manufacturers supplied shoes with cardboard soles and fast-disintegrating uniforms of reprocessed or “shoddy” wool rather than virgin wool. Hence the reproachful term “shoddy millionaires” was doubly fair. One proﬁteer reluctantly admitted that his proﬁts were “painfully large.” Newly invented laborsaving machinery enabled the North to expand economically, even though the cream of its manpower was being drained off to the

 ﬁghting front. The sewing machine wrought wonders in fabricating uniforms and military footwear. The marriage of military need and innovative machinery largely ended the production of customtailored clothing. Graduated standard mea surements were introduced, creating “sizes” that were widely used in the civilian garment industry forever after. Clattering mechanical reapers, which numbered about 250,000 by 1865, proved hardly less potent than thundering guns. They not only released tens of thousands of farm boys for the army but fed them their ﬁeld rations. They produced vast surpluses of grain that, when sent abroad, helped dethrone King Cotton. They provided proﬁts with which the North was able to buy munitions and supplies from abroad. They contributed to the feverish prosperity of the North—a prosperity that enabled the Union to weather the war with ﬂying colors.

Wartime Transformations


 Other industries were humming. The discovery of petroleum gushers in 1859 had led to a rush of “FiftyNiners” to Pennsylvania. The result was the birth of a new industry, with its “petroleum plutocracy” and “coal oil Johnnies.” Pioneers continued to push westward during the war, altogether an estimated 300,000 people. Major magnets were free gold nuggets and free land under the Homestead Act of 1862. Strong propellants were the federal draft agents. The only major Northern industry to suffer a crippling setback was the ocean-carrying trade, which fell prey to the Alabama and other raiders. The Civil War was a women’s war, too. The protracted conﬂ ict opened new opportunities for women. When men departed in uniform, women often took their jobs. In Washington, D.C., ﬁve hundred women clerks (“government girls”) became government workers, with over one hundred in the Treasury Department alone. The booming military demand for shoes and clothing, combined with technological marvels like the sewing machine, likewise drew countless women into industrial employment. Before the war one industrial worker in four had been female; during the war the ratio rose to one in three. Other women, on both sides, stepped up to the ﬁghting front—or close behind it. More than four hundred women accompanied husbands and sweethearts into battle by posing as male soldiers. Other women took on dangerous spy missions. One woman was executed for smuggling gold to the Confederacy. Dr. Elizabeth Blackwell, America’s ﬁ rst female physician, helped organize the U.S. Sanitary Commission to assist the Union armies in the ﬁeld. The commission trained nurses, collected medical supplies, and equipped hospitals. Commission work helped many women to acquire the orga ni zational skills and the self-conﬁdence that would propel the women’s movement forward after the war. Heroically energetic Clara Barton and dedicated Dorothea Dix, superintendent of nurses for the Union army, helped transform nursing from a lowly service into a respected profession—and in the process opened up another major sphere of employment for women in the postwar era. Equally renowned in the South was Sally Tompkins, who ran a Richmond inﬁ rmary for wounded Confederate soldiers and was awarded the rank of captain by Confederate president Jefferson Davis. Still other women, North as well as South, orga nized bazaars and fairs that raised millions of dollars for the relief of widows, orphans, and disabled soldiers.



A
Crushed Cotton Kingdom  The South fought to the point of exhaustion. The suffocation caused by the blockade, together with the destruction wrought by invaders, took a terrible toll. Possessing 30 percent of the national wealth in 1860, the South claimed only 12 percent in 1870. Before the war the average per capita income of Southerners (including slaves) was about two-thirds that of Northerners. The Civil War squeezed the average Southern income to two-ﬁ fths of the Northern level, where it remained for the rest of the century. The South’s bid for independence exacted a cruel and devastating cost. Transportation collapsed. The South was even driven to the economic cannibalism of pulling up rails from the less-used lines to repair the main ones. Window weights were melted down into bullets; gourds replaced dishes; pins became so scarce that they were loaned with reluctance. To the brutal end, the South mustered remarkable resourcefulness and spirit. Women buoyed up their menfolk, many of whom had seen enough of war at ﬁrst hand to be heartily sick of it. A proposal was made by a number of women that they cut off their long hair and sell it abroad. But the project was not adopted, partly because of the blockade. The self-sacriﬁcing women took pride in denying themselves the silks and satins of their Northern sisters. The chorus of a song, “The Southern Girl,” touched a cheerful note: So hurrah! hurrah! For Southern Rights, hurrah! Hurrah! for the homespun dress the Southern ladies wear. At war’s end the Northern Captains of Industry had conquered the Southern Lords of the Manor. A crippled South left the capitalistic North free to work its own way, with high tariffs and other beneﬁts. The manufacturing moguls of the North, ushering in the full-ﬂedged Industrial Revolution, were headed for increased dominance over American economic and political life. Hitherto the agrarian “slavocracy” of the South had partially checked the ambitions of the rising plutocracy of the North. Now cotton capitalism had lost out to industrial capitalism. The South of 1865 was to be rich in little but amputees, war heroes, ruins, and memories.



Chapter 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 1861–1865


 CHRONOLOGY

 Confederate government formed Lincoln takes ofﬁce (March 4) Fort Sumter ﬁ red on (April 12) Four upper South states secede (April–June) Morrill Tariff Act passed Trent affair Lincoln suspends writ of habeas corpus



 Confederacy enacts conscription Homestead Act

1862–


 Alabama raids Northern shipping

KEY TERMS
Fort Sumter (463) Border States (464) West Virginia (464) Trent affair (472) Alabama (473) Laird rams (473) Dominion of Canada (474) writ of habeas corpus (475) 


 Union enacts conscription New York City draft riots National Banking System established

1863–


 Napoleon III installs Archduke Maximilian as emperor of Mexico



 Alabama sunk by Union warship

PEOPLE TO KNOW
New York draft riots (475) Morrill Tariff Act (476) greenbacks (477) National Banking System (477) Homestead Act (479) U.S. Sanitary Commission (479) 
Charles Francis Adams
Napoleon III
Maximilian
Jefferson Davis


Elizabeth Blackwell
Clara Barton
Sally Tompkins


To Learn More
Daniel Aaron, The Unwritten War: American Writers and
 the Civil War (1973) David W. Blight, Race and Reunion: The Civil War in American Memory (2001) Richard J. Carwardine, Lincoln (2003) LaWanda Cox, Lincoln and Black Freedom (1981) David H. Donald, Lincoln (1995) ———, ed., Why the North Won the Civil War (1960) Drew Gilpin Faust, The Creation of Confederate Nationalism (1988) ———, Mothers of Invention: Women of the Slaveholding South in the American Civil War (1996) William Freehling, The South vs. The South: How AntiConfederate Southerners Shaped the Course of the Civil War (2001)

Doris Kearns Goodwin, Team of Rivals: The Political Genius
 of Abraham Lincoln (2005) Elizabeth D. Leonard, Yankee Women: Gender Battles in the Civil War (1994) Randall M. Miller et al., Religion and the American Civil War (1998)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Furnace
 of Civil War




1861–1865
 My paramount object in this struggle is to save the Union, and is not either to save or to destroy slavery.

W


 hen President Lincoln issued his call to the states for seventy-ﬁve thousand militiamen on April 15, 1861, he envisioned them serving for only ninety days. Reafﬁ rming his limited war aims, he declared that he had “no purpose, directly or indirectly, to interfere with slavery in the States where it exists.” With a swift ﬂourish of federal force, he hoped to show the folly of secession and rapidly return the rebellious states to the Union. But the war was to be neither brief nor limited. When the guns fell silent four years later, hundreds of thousands of soldiers on both sides lay dead, slavery was ended forever, and the nation faced the challenge of reintegrating the defeated but still recalcitrant South into the Union.

Bull Run Ends the
“Ninety-Day War”
 Northern newspapers, at ﬁ rst sharing Lincoln’s expectation of a quick victory, raised the cry “On to Rich-

 mond!” In this yeasty at mosphere, a Union army of some thirty thousand men drilled near Washington in the summer of 1861. It was ill-prepared for battle, but the press and the public clamored for action. Lincoln eventually concluded that an attack on a smaller Confederate force at Bull Run (Manassas Junction), some thirty miles southwest of Washington, might be worth a try. If successful, it would demonstrate the superiority of Union arms. It might even lead to the capture of the Confederate capital at Richmond, one hundred miles to the south. If Richmond fell, secession would be thoroughly discredited, and the Union could be restored without damage to the economic and social system of the South. Raw Yankee recruits swaggered out of Washington toward Bull Run on July 21, 1861, as if they were headed for a sporting event. Congressmen and spectators trailed along with their lunch baskets to witness the fun. At ﬁ rst the battle went well for the Yankees. But Thomas J. (“Stonewall”) Jackson’s gray-clad warriors stood like a stone wall (here he won his nickname), and

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





