Chapter 29 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 1912–1916


 Wilson’s New Freedom, by contrast, favored small enterprise, entrepreneurship, and the free functioning of unregulated and unmonopolized markets. The Democrats shunned social-welfare proposals and pinned their economic faith on competition—on the “man on the make,” as Wilson put it. The keynote of Wilson’s campaign was not regulation but fragmentation of the big industrial combines, chieﬂy by means of vigorous enforcement of the antitrust laws. The election of 1912 thus offered the voters a choice not merely of policies but of political and economic philosophies—a rarity in U.S. history. The heat of the campaign cooled a bit when, in Milwaukee, Roosevelt was shot in the chest by a fanatic. The Rough Rider suspended active campaigning for more than two weeks after delivering, with bull moose gameness and a bloody shirt, his scheduled speech.

Woodrow Wilson:
A
Minority President  Former professor Wilson won handily, with 435 electoral votes and 6,296,547 popular votes. The “thirdparty” candidate, Roosevelt, ﬁ nished second, receiving 88 electoral votes and 4,118,571 popular votes. Taft won only 8 electoral votes and 3,486,720 popular votes (see Map 29.1). The election ﬁgures are fascinating. Wilson, with only 41 percent of the popular vote, was clearly a minority president, though his party won a majority in Congress. His popular total was actually smaller than Bryan had amassed in any of his three defeats, despite the increase in population. Taft and Roosevelt together polled over 1.25 million more votes than the Demo-

 WASH.

N.H.
VT. D-4

P-7


MONT. D-4

 ME.

R-4


N. DAK.

D-6


D-5


 OREGON

 MINN.

D-8


 MASS.

P-12


 IDAHO

S. DAK.

D-4


 WISC.

P-5


 WYO.

D-13


D-3


 NEBR.

D-13


D-8


 CALIF.

R-4


 ILL.

D-29


COLO. D-6

 KANSAS

D-3


N. MEX.

D-10


D-3


D-15


 OHIO

N.J. D-7


D-14
D-3


 W.VA.

 VA.

D-12


D-13


MD. D-8

N.C.


 TENN.

D-12


D-12


S.C.


 ARK.

D-9


D-9


MISS. D-10

 TEXAS

 CONN.

 DEL.

D-24


 KY.

D-18


 OKLA.

 IND.

P-38


D-8


 MO.

D-10


 ARIZ.

R.I.


D-5


 PA.

 IOWA

 UTAH

P-11/D-2


D-45


MICH. P-15

NEV. D-3

D-18


N.Y.


ALA. D-12

 GA.

D-14


 LA.

D-20


D-10


FLA. D-6

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Wilson (Democrat)




82.0%


6,296,547


41.9%




16.5%


4,118,571


27.4%


Taft (Republican)




1.5%


3,486,720


23.2%


Debs (Socialist)




0.0%


900,672


6.0%


Roosevelt (Progressive)


 No returns, unsettled, etc.

 Map 29.1 Presidential Election of 1912 (showing votes by county, with electoral vote by state) The Republican split surely boosted Wilson to victory, as he failed to win a clear majority in any state outside the old Confederacy. The election gave the Democrats solid control of the White House and both houses of Congress for the ﬁrst time since the Civil War.

Interactive Map


Wilson in the White House


 crats. Progressivism rather than Wilson was the runaway winner. Although the Democratic total obviously included many conser vatives in the solid South, the combined progressive vote for Wilson and Roosevelt, totaling 68 percent, far exceeded the tally of the more conser vative Taft, who got only 23 percent. To the progressive tally must be added some support for the Socialist candidate, the persistent Eugene V. Debs, who rolled up 900,672 votes, 6 percent of the total cast, or more than twice as many as he had netted four years earlier. Starry-eyed Socialists dreamed of being in the White House within eight years. Roosevelt’s lone-wolf course was tragic both for himself and for his former Republican associates. Perhaps, to rephrase William Allen White, he had bitten himself and gone mad. The Progressive party, which was primarily a one-man show, had no future because it had elected few candidates to state and local ofﬁces; the Socialists, in contrast, elected more than a thousand. Without patronage plums to hand out to faithful workers, death by slow starvation was inevitable for the upstart party. Yet the Progressives made a tremendous showing for a hastily orga nized third party and helped spur the enactment of many of their pet reforms by the Wilsonian Democrats. As for the Republicans, they were thrust into unaccustomed minority status in Congress for the next six years and were frozen out of the White House for eight years. Taft himself had a fruitful old age. He taught law for eight pleasant years at Yale University and in 1921 became chief justice of the Supreme Court—a job for which he was far more happily suited than the presidency.

Wilson: The Idealist
 in Politics ( Thomas) Woodrow Wilson, the second Democratic president since 1861, looked like the ascetic intellectual he was, with his clean-cut features, pinched-on eyeglasses, and trim ﬁgure. Born in Virginia shortly before the Civil War and reared in Georgia and the Carolinas, the professor-politician was the ﬁ rst man from one of the seceded southern states to reach the White House since Zachary Taylor, sixty-four years earlier. The impact of Dixieland on young “Tommy” Wilson was profound. He sympathized with the Confederacy’s gallant attempt to win its independence, a sentiment that partly inspired his ideal of self-determination for people of other countries. Steeped in the traditions of



 Jeffersonian democracy, he shared Jefferson’s faith in the masses—if they were properly informed. Son of a Presbyterian minister, Wilson was reared in an at mosphere of fervent piety. He later used the presidential pulpit to preach his inspirational political sermons. A moving orator, Wilson could rise on the wings of spiritual power to soaring eloquence. Skillfully using a persuasive voice, he relied not on arm-waving but on sincerity and moral appeal. As a lifelong student of ﬁ nely chiseled words, he turned out to be a “phraseocrat” who coined many noble epigrams. Someone has remarked that he was born halfway between the Bible and the dictionary and never strayed far from either. A profound student of government, Wilson believed that the chief executive should play a dynamic role. He was convinced that Congress could not function properly unless the president, like a kind of prime minister, got out in front and provided leadership. He enjoyed dramatic success, both as governor and as president, in appealing over the heads of legislators to the sovereign people. Splendid though Wilson’s intellectual equipment was, he suffered from serious defects of personality. Though jovial and witty in private, he could be cold and standofﬁsh in public. Incapable of unbending and acting the showman, like “Teddy” Roosevelt, he lacked the common touch. He loved humanity in the mass rather than the individual in person. His academic background caused him to feel most at home with scholars, although he had to work with politicians. An austere and somewhat arrogant intellectual, he looked down his nose through pince-nez glasses upon lesser minds, including journalists. He was especially intolerant of stupid senators, whose “bungalow” minds made him “sick.” Wilson’s burning idealism—especially his desire to reform ever-present wickedness—drove him forward faster than lesser spirits were willing to go. His sense of moral righteousness was such that he often found compromise difﬁcult; black was black, wrong was wrong, and one should never compromise with wrong. President Wilson’s Scottish Presbyterian ancestors had passed on to him an inﬂexible stubbornness. When convinced that he was right, the principled Wilson would break before he would bend, unlike the pragmatic Roosevelt.

Wilson Tackles the Tariff
 Few presidents have arrived at the White House with a clearer program than Wilson’s or one destined to be so



Chapter 29 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 1912–1916


 completely achieved. The new president called for an all-out assault on what he called “the triple wall of privilege”: the tariff, the banks, and the trusts. He tackled the tariff ﬁ rst, summoning Congress into special session in early 1913. In a precedentshattering move, he did not send his presidential message over to the Capitol to be read loudly by a bored clerk, as had been the custom since Jefferson’s day. Instead he appeared in person before a joint session of Congress and presented his appeal with stunning eloquence and effectiveness.

 Moved by Wilson’s aggressive leadership, the House swiftly passed the Underwood Tariff, which provided for a substantial reduction of rates. When a swarm of lobbyists descended on the Senate seeking to disembowel the bill, Wilson promptly issued a combative message to the people, urging them to hold their elected representatives in line. The tactic worked. The force of public opinion, aroused by the president’s oratory, secured late in 1913 ﬁ nal approval of the bill Wilson wanted. The new Underwood Tariff substantially reduced import fees. It also was a landmark in tax legislation. Under authority granted by the recently ratiﬁed Sixteenth Amendment, Congress enacted a graduated income tax, beginning with a modest levy on incomes over $3,000 (then considerably higher than the average family’s income). By 1917 revenue from the income tax shot ahead of receipts from the tariff. This gap has since been vastly widened.

Wilson Battles the Bankers


Woodrow Wilson (1856–1924) at Princeton
 Commencement with Andrew Carnegie, 1906 Before his election to the presidency of the United States in 1912, Wilson (left) served as president of Princeton University (1902–1910) and governor of New Jersey (1910–1912). In all three ofﬁces, he undertook substantial reforms. Fighting desperately later for the League of Nations, at the cost of his health, Wilson said, “I would rather fail in a cause that I know some day will triumph than to win in a cause that I know some day will fail.”

 A second bastion of the “triple wall of privilege” was the antiquated and inadequate banking and currency system, long since outgrown by the Republic’s lusty economic expansion. The country’s ﬁ nancial structure, still creaking along under the Civil War National Banking Act, revealed glaring defects. Its most serious shortcoming, as exposed by the panic of 1907, was the inelasticity of the currency. Banking reserves were heavily concentrated in New York and a handful of other large cities and could not be mobilized in times of ﬁ nancial stress into areas that were badly pinched. In 1908 Congress had authorized an investigation headed by a mossback banker, Republican senator Aldrich. Three years later Aldrich’s special commission recommended a gigantic bank with numerous branches—in effect, a third Bank of the United States. For their part, Democratic banking reformers heeded the ﬁ ndings of a House committee chaired by Congressman Arsene Pujo, which traced the tentacles of the “money monster” into the hidden vaults of American banking and business. President Wilson’s conﬁdant, progressive-minded Massachusetts attorney Louis D. Brandeis, further fanned the ﬂames of reform with his incendiary though scholarly book Other People’s Money and How the Bankers Use It (1914). In June 1913, in a second dramatic personal appearance before both houses of Congress, the president delivered a stirring plea for sweeping reform of the banking system. He ringingly endorsed Demo-

 Wilson’s Economic Reforms



 the amount of money in circulation could be swiftly increased as needed for the legitimate requirements of business. The Federal Reserve Act was a red-letter achievement. It carried the nation with ﬂying banners through the ﬁnancial crises of the First World War of 1914–1918. Without it, the Republic’s progress toward the modern economic age would have been seriously retarded.

The President Tames the Trusts


 Reading the Death Warrant This cartoon appeared in a New York newspaper soon after Woodrow Wilson called for dramatic reform of the banking system before both houses of Congress. With the “money trust” of bankers and businessmen cowed, Wilson was able to win popular and congressional support for the Federal Reserve Act of 1913.

 cratic proposals for a decentralized bank in government hands, as opposed to Republican demands for a huge private bank with ﬁ fteen branches. Again appealing to the sovereign people, Wilson scored another triumph. In 1913 he signed the epochal Federal Reserve Act, the most important piece of economic legislation between the Civil War and the New Deal. The new Federal Reserve Board, appointed by the president, oversaw a nationwide system of twelve regional reserve districts, each with its own central bank. Although these regional banks were actually bankers’ banks, owned by member ﬁnancial institutions, the ﬁ nal authority of the Federal Reserve Board guaranteed a substantial mea sure of public control. The board was also empowered to issue paper money— “Federal Reserve Notes”—backed by commercial paper, such as promissory notes of businesspeople. Thus

 Without pausing for breath, Wilson pushed toward the last remaining rampart in the “triple wall of privilege”— the trusts. Early in 1914 he again went before Congress in a personal appearance that still carried drama. Nine months and thousands of words later, Congress responded with the Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914. The new law empowered a presidentially appointed commission to turn a searchlight on industries engaged in interstate commerce, such as the meatpackers. The commissioners were expected to crush monopoly at the source by rooting out unfair trade practices, including unlawful competition, false advertising, mislabeling, adulteration, and bribery. The knot of monopoly was further cut by the Clayton Anti-Trust Act of 1914. It lengthened the shopworn Sherman Act’s list of business practices that were deemed objectionable, including price discrimination and interlocking directorates (whereby the same individuals served as directors of supposedly competing ﬁ rms), an end often achieved through holding companies (see Figure 29.1). The Clayton Act also conferred long-overdue beneﬁts on labor. Conservative courts had unexpectedly

 Voting stock

SUPER HOLDING COMPANY

 Other stock

HOLDS MORE THAN 50% OF VOTING STOCK HOLDING COMPANY A

HOLDING COMPANY B

HOLDING COMPANY C

HOLDS MORE THAN 50% OF VOTING STOCK

CORP. A

CORP. B

CORP. C

CORP. D

CORP. E

CORP. F

CORP. G

CORP. H

CORP. I

Figure 29.1 Organization of Holding Companies
 Keep in mind that the voting stock of a corporation is often only a fraction of the total stock.



Chapter 29 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 1912–1916


 been ruling that trade unions fell under the antimonopoly restraints of the Sherman Act. A classic case involved striking hatmakers in Danbury, Connecticut, who were assessed triple damages of more than $250,000, which resulted in the loss of their savings and homes. The Clayton Act therefore sought to exempt labor and agricultural orga ni zations from antitrust prosecution, while explicitly legalizing strikes and peaceful picketing. Union leader Samuel Gompers hailed the act as the Magna Carta of labor because it legally lifted human labor out of the category of “a commodity or article of commerce.” But the rejoicing was premature, as conservative judges in later years continued to clip the wings of the union movement.

Wilsonian Progressivism
 at High Tide Energetically scaling the “triple wall of privilege,” Woodrow Wilson had treated the nation to a dazzling demonstration of vigorous presidential leadership. He proved nearly irresistible in his ﬁ rst eighteen months in ofﬁce. For once, a political creed was matched by deed, as the progressive reformers racked up victory after victory. Standing at the peak of his powers at the head of the progressive forces, Wilson pressed ahead with further reforms. The Federal Farm Loan Act of 1916 made credit available to farmers at low rates of interest—as long demanded by the Populists. The Warehouse Act of 1916 authorized loans on the security of staple crops— another Populist idea. Other laws beneﬁted rural America by providing for highway construction and the establishment of agricultural extension work in the state colleges. Sweaty laborers also made gains as the progressive wave foamed forward. Sailors, treated brutally from cat-o’-nine-tails days onward, were given relief by the La Follette Seaman’s Act of 1915. It required decent treatment and a living wage on American merchant ships. One unhappy result of this well-intentioned law was the crippling of America’s merchant marine, as freight rates spiraled upward with the crew’s wages. Wilson further helped the workers with the Workingmen’s Compensation Act of 1916, granting assistance to federal civil-service employees during periods of disability. In the same year, the president approved an act restricting child labor on products ﬂowing into interstate commerce, though the stand-pat Supreme Court soon invalidated the law. Railroad workers, num-

 bering about 1.7 million, were not sidetracked. The Adamson Act of 1916 established an eight-hour day for all employees on trains in interstate commerce, with extra pay for overtime. Wilson earned the enmity of businesspeople and bigots but endeared himself to progressives when in 1916 he nominated for the Supreme Court the prominent reformer Louis D. Brandeis—the ﬁ rst Jew to be called to the high bench. Yet even Wilson’s progressivism had its limits, and it clearly stopped short of better treatment for blacks. The southern-bred Wilson actually presided over accelerated segregation in the federal bureaucracy. When a delegation of black leaders personally protested to him, the schoolmasterish president virtually froze them out of his ofﬁce. Despite these limitations, Wilson knew that to be reelected in 1916, he needed to identify himself clearly as the candidate of progressivism. He appeased business people by making conser vative appointments to the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Trade Commission, but he devoted most of his energy to cultivating progressive support. Wilson’s election in 1912 had been something of a ﬂuke, owing largely to the TaftRoosevelt split in the Republican ranks. To remain in the White House, the president would have to woo the bull moose voters into the Democratic fold.

New Directions in
Foreign Policy
 In one important area, Wilson chose not to answer the trumpet call of the bull moosers. In contrast to Roosevelt and even Taft, Wilson recoiled from an aggressive foreign policy. Hating imperialism, he was repelled by TR’s big stickism. Suspicious of Wall Street, he detested the so-called dollar diplomacy of Taft. In ofﬁce only a week, Wilson declared war on dollar diplomacy. He proclaimed that the government would no longer offer special support to American investors in Latin America and China. Shivering from this Wilsonian bucket of cold water, American bankers pulled out of the Taft-engineered six-nation loan to China the next day. In a similarly self-denying vein, Wilson persuaded Congress in early 1914 to repeal the Panama Canal Tolls Act of 1912, which had exempted American coastwise shipping from tolls and thereby provoked sharp protests from injured Britain. The president further chimed in with the anti-imperial song of Bryan and other Democrats when he signed the Jones Act in 1916. It granted to the Philippines the boon of territorial status and prom-



 Wilson’s Foreign Policy

 ised independence as soon as a “stable government” could be established. Wilson’s racial prejudices, however, made it difﬁcult for him to anticipate anything other than a long political tutelage for the Filipinos. Indeed, not until July 4, 1946—thirty years later—did the United States accept Philippine independence. Wilson also partially defused a menacing crisis with Japan in 1913. The California legislature, still seeking to rid the Golden State of Japanese settlers, prohibited them from owning land. Tokyo, understandably irritated, lodged vigorous protests. At Fortress Corregidor, in the Philippines, American gunners were put on around-the-clock alert. But when Wilson dispatched Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan to plead with the Cal i fornia legislature to soften its stand, tensions eased somewhat. Political turmoil in Haiti soon forced Wilson to eat some of his anti-imperialist words. The climax of the

 disorders came in 1914–1915, when an outraged populace literally tore to pieces the brutal Haitian president. In 1915 Wilson reluctantly dispatched marines to protect American lives and property. They remained for nineteen years, making Haiti an American protectorate. In 1916 he stole a page from Roosevelt’s corollary to the Monroe Doctrine and concluded a treaty with Haiti providing for U.S. supervision of ﬁ nances and the police. In the same year, he sent the leathernecked marines to quell riots in the Dominican Republic, and that debt-cursed land came under the shadow of the American eagle’s wings for the next eight years. In 1917 Wilson purchased from Denmark the Virgin Islands, in the West Indies, tightening the grip of Uncle Sam in these shark-infested waters. Increasingly, the Caribbean Sea, with its vital approaches to the nownavigable Panama Canal, was taking on the earmarks of a Yankee preserve (see Map 29.2).

 Map 29.2 The United States in the Caribbean, 1898–1941 This map explains why many Latin Americans accused the United States of turning the Caribbean Sea into a “Yankee lake.” It also suggests that Uncle Sam was much less “isolationist” in his own backyard than he was in faraway Europe or Asia.

Interactive Map


100°W


Columbus


U.S.
Expeditionary Force, 1916 –1917


 SONOR

A


30°N


90°W


U N I T E D S TAT E S


 ALABAMA

MISS. TEXAS

80°W


 GEORGIA



400 Mi.


AT L A N T I C O C E A N
Sinking of Maine, 1898 
Gulf of Mexico


 U.S. troops, 1915 –1934 Financial supervision, 1916 –1941

Miami


Revolutions, 1868 –1878, 1895 –1898
 U.S. troops, 1898 –1902, 1906 –1909, 1912, 1917 –1922 Platt Amendment, 1903 –1934 U.S. exports to, 1865 –1917 = $1.6 billion

Tropic of Cancer


400 Km.


 FLORIDA

New Orleans


Santa Ysabel
Parral






 LA.

Houston




 U.S. attempted to buy, 1869 U.S. troops, 1916 –1924 Financial supervision, 1905 –1941

Bahamas
(Gr. Br.)


Havana


 CUBA

 Purchased from Denmark, 1917

Tampico


 MEXICO

 Guantánamo

 U.S. attack, 1914

DOMINICAN PUERTO REPUBLIC RICO HAITI

 U.S. naval base, 1903 –

20°N


Mexico
City


Veracruz


Revolution, 1910
 Americans controlled 43% of Mexican property, 1910 U.S. exports to, 1865 –1917 = $1.3 billion

BR. HONDURAS GUATEMALA

Caribbean Sea


 U.S. possession after 1898 Puerto Ricans became U.S. citizens, 1917

EL SALVADOR

U.S. ZONE

10°N
60°W


Caracas
 U.S. leased Corn Is., 1914

COSTA RICA

Colon


 U.S. acquired Canal Zone, 1903 Canal completed, 1914

Barbados
(Gr. Br.)
Trinidad
(Gr. Br.)


 NICARAGUA

Caribbean
Sea


Martinique
(Fr.)


 U.S. troops, 1909 –1910, 1912 –1925, 1926 –1933 Financial supervision, 1911–1924 Canal option, 1916

 HONDURAS

 United Fruit Co. organized for banana trade, 1899

PACIFIC OCEAN

Virgin Is.
Jamaica
(Gr. Br.)


 U.S. troops, 1924 –1925

Guadeloupe
(Fr.)


 VENEZUELA

N


 Venezuelan crisis, 1895 –1896

PANAMA
Bogatá 
 United States possession United States protectorate or quasi-protectorate

Panama City


CANAL ZONE

Gulf of
Panama


 COLOMBIA

70°W


 BRAZIL



Chapter 29 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 1912–1916


U.S.
Marines in Haiti, 1919  The United States sent the marines to Haiti in 1915 to protect American economic interests. They remained for nineteen years.

Moralistic Diplomacy
 in Mexico Riﬂe bullets whining across the southern border served as a constant reminder that all was not quiet in Mexico. For decades Mexico had been sorely exploited by foreign investors in oil, railroads, and mines. By 1913 American capitalists had sunk about a billion dollars into the underdeveloped but generously endowed country. But if Mexico was rich, the Mexicans were poor. Fed up with their miserable lot, they at last revolted. Their revolution took an ugly turn in early 1913, when a conscienceless clique (with the support of President Taft’s ambassador to Mexico) murdered the popular new revolutionary president and installed General Victoriano Huerta, an Indian, in the president’s chair. All this chaos accelerated a massive migration of Mexicans to the United States. More than a million Spanishspeaking newcomers tramped across the southern border in the ﬁ rst three decades of the twentieth century. Settling mostly in Texas, New Mexico, Arizona,

 and Cal i fornia, they swung picks building highways and railroads or followed the fruit harvests as pickers. Though often segregated in Spanish-speaking enclaves, they helped to create a unique borderland culture that blended Mexican and American folkways. The revolutionary bloodshed also menaced American lives and property in Mexico. Cries for intervention burst from the lips of American jingoes. Prominent among those chanting for war was the inﬂuential chain newspaper publisher William Randolph Hearst, whose views presumably were colored by his ownership of a Mexican ranch larger than Rhode Island. Yet once again, President Wilson refused to practice the same old dollar diplomacy of his predecessors, deeming it “perilous” to determine foreign policy “in the terms of material interest.” Wilson strove as best he could to steer a moral course in Mexico. He sent his aggressive ambassador packing, imposed an arms embargo, and refused to recognize ofﬁcially the murderous government of “that brute” Huerta, even though most foreign powers acknowledged Huerta’s bloody-handed regime. “I am going to teach the South American republics to elect

The Mexican Imbroglio


 good men,” the former professor declared. He put his munitions where his mouth was in 1914, when he allowed American arms to ﬂow to Huerta’s principal rivals, white-bearded Venustiano Carranza and the ﬁ rebrand Francisco (“Pancho”) Villa. The Mexican volcano erupted at the Atlantic seaport of Tampico in April 1914, when a small party of American sailors was arrested. The Mexicans promptly released the captives and apologized, but they refused the affronted American admiral’s demand for a salute of twenty-one guns. Wilson, heavy-hearted but stubbornly determined to eliminate Huerta, asked Congress for authority to use force against Mexico. Before Congress could act, Wilson ordered the navy to seize the Mexican port of Veracruz to thwart the arrival of a German steamer carrying Huerta-bound guns and ammunition. Huerta as well as Carranza hotly protested against this high-handed Yankee maneuver. Just as a full-dress shooting conﬂ ict seemed inevitable, Wilson was rescued by an offer of mediation from the ABC Powers—Argentina, Brazil, and Chile. Huerta collapsed in July 1914 under pressure from within and without. He was succeeded by his archrival, Venustiano Carranza, still ﬁercely resentful of Wilson’s military meddling. The whole sorry Tampico Incident did not augur well for the future of United States–Mexican relations. “Pancho” Villa, a combination of bandit and Robin Hood, had meanwhile stolen the spotlight. He emerged as the chief rival to President Carranza, whom Wilson now reluctantly supported. Challenging Carranza’s authority while also punishing the gringos, Villa’s men ruthlessly hauled sixteen young American mining en-

In October 1913 President Woodrow Wilson (1856–
 1924) addressed the Southern Commercial Congress in Mobile, Alabama, and drew a connection between the battle against the trusts at home and the travails of countries south of the border:

“


 We have seen material interests threaten constitutional freedom in the United States. Therefore, we will now know how to sympathize with those in the rest of [Latin] America who have to contend with such powers, not only from within their borders but from outside their borders also.

”




 Wilson Confronts Huerta A Mexican view of the tense standoff between Wilson and the Mexican president, Victoriano Huerta. The artist’s rendering seems to reﬂect the famous observation of long-time Mexican leader Porﬁrio Diaz: “Poor Mexico! So far from God, so close to the United States.”

 gineers off a train traveling through northern Mexico in January 1916 and killed them. A month later Villa and his followers, hoping to provoke a war between Wilson and Carranza, blazed across the border into Columbus, New Mexico, and murdered another nineteen Americans. General John J. (“Black Jack”)* Pershing, a grimfaced and ramrod-erect veteran of the Cuban and Philippine campaigns, was ordered to break up the bandit band. His hastily orga nized force of several

 *So called from his earlier ser vice as an ofﬁcer with the crack black 10th Cavalry.



Chapter 29 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 1912–1916


 “Pancho” Villa with His Ragtag Army in Mexico, ca. 1916 His daring, impetuosity, and horsemanship made Villa a hero to the masses of northern Mexico. Yet he proved to be a violent and ineffective crusader against social abuses, and he was assassinated in 1923.

 thousand mounted troops penetrated deep into rugged Mexico with surprising speed. They clashed with Carranza’s forces and mauled the Villistas but missed capturing Villa himself. As the threat of war with Germany loomed larger, the invading army was withdrawn in January 1917.

Thunder Across the Sea
 Europe’s powder magazine, long smoldering, blew up in the summer of 1914, when the ﬂaming pistol of a Serb patriot killed the heir to the throne of AustriaHungary in Sarajevo. An outraged Vienna government, backed by Germany, forthwith presented a stern ultimatum to neighboring Serbia. An explosive chain reaction followed. Tiny Serbia, backed by its powerful Slav neighbor Russia, refused to bend the knee sufﬁciently. The Russian tsar began to mobilize his ponderous war machine, menacing Germany on the east, even as his ally, France, confronted Germany on the west. In alarm, the Germans struck suddenly at France through unoffending Belgium; their objective was to knock their ancient enemy out of action so that they would have two free hands to repel Russia. Great Britain, its coastline jeopardized by the assault on Belgium, was sucked into the conﬂagration on the side of France. Almost overnight most of Europe was locked in a ﬁght to the death. On one side were arrayed the Cen-

 tral Powers: Germany and Austria-Hungary, and later Turkey and Bulgaria. On the other side were the Allies: principally France, Britain, and Russia, and later Japan and Italy. Americans thanked God for the ocean moats and self-righteously congratulated themselves on having had ancestors wise enough to have abandoned the hell pits of Europe. America felt strong, snug, smug, and secure—but not for long.

A
Precarious Neutrality  President Wilson’s grief at the outbreak of war was compounded by the recent death of his wife. He sorrowfully issued the routine neutrality proclamation and called on Americans to be neutral in thought as well as deed. But such scrupulous evenhandedness proved difﬁcult. Both sides wooed the United States, the great neutral in the West. The British enjoyed the boon of close cultural, linguistic, and economic ties with America and had the added advantage of controlling most of the transatlantic cables. Their censors sheared away war stories harmful to the Allies and drenched the United States with tales of German bestiality. The Germans and the Austro-Hungarians counted on the natural sympathies of their transplanted countrymen in America. Including persons with at least one foreign-born parent, people with blood ties to the

War Breaks Out in Europe




Table 29.1 Principal Foreign Elements in the United States, Census of 1910


Country of Origin


Foreign-Born


 Natives with Two Foreign-Born Parents

 Natives with One Foreign-Born Parent

Total


Central
Powers


{


Germany
Austria-Hungary


2,501,181
1,670,524


3,911,847
900,129


1,869,590
131,133


8,282,61
2,701,786


Allied
Powers


{


Great Britain
(Ireland)*
Russia
Italy


1,219,968
1,352,155
1,732,421
1,343,070


852,610
2,141,577
949,316
695,187


1,158,474
1,010,628
70,938
60,103


3,231,052
4,504,360
2,752,675
2,098,360


13,345,545


12,916,311


5,981,526


32,243,282


14.5


14.0


6.5


35.0


 TOTAL (for all foreign countries, including those not listed) Percentage of total U.S. population (91,972,266) *Ireland was not yet independent.

 Central Powers numbered some 11 million in 1914. Some of these recent immigrants expressed noisy sympathy for the fatherland, but most were simply grateful to be so distant from the fray (see Table 29.1). Most Americans were anti-German from the outset. With his villainous upturned mustache, Kaiser Wilhelm II seemed the embodiment of arrogant autocracy, an impression strengthened by Germany’s ruthless strike at neutral Belgium. German and Austrian agents further tarnished the image of the Central Powers in American eyes when they resorted to violence in American factories and ports. When a German operative in 1915 absentmindedly left his briefcase on a New York elevated car, its documents detailing plans for industrial sabotage were quickly discovered and publicized. American opinion, already ill-disposed, was further inﬂamed against the kaiser and Germany. Yet the great majority of Americans earnestly hoped to stay out of the horrible war.

America Earns Blood Money
 When Europe burst into ﬂames in 1914, the United States was bogged down in a worrisome business recession. But as fate would have it, British and French war orders soon pulled American industry out of the morass of hard times and onto a peak of war-born

 prosperity (see Table 29.2). Part of this boom was ﬁnanced by American bankers, notably the Wall Street ﬁ rm of J. P. Morgan and Company, which eventually advanced to the Allies the enormous sum of $2.3 billion during the period of American neutrality. The Central Powers protested bitterly against the immense trade between America and the Allies, but this trafﬁc did not in fact violate the international neutrality laws. Germany was technically free to trade with the United States. It was prevented from doing so not by American policy but by geography and the British navy. Trade between Germany and America had to move across the Atlantic; but the British controlled the sea-lanes, and they threw a noose-tight blockade of mines and ships across the North Sea, gateway to German ports. Over the unavailing protests of American shippers, farmers, and manufacturers, the British began forcing American vessels off the high seas and into their ports. This harassment of American shipping proved highly effective, as trade between Germany and the United States virtually ceased. Hard-pressed Germany did not tamely consent to being starved out. In retaliation for the British blockade, in February 1915 Berlin announced a submarine war area around the British Isles (see Map 29.3). The submarine was a weapon so new that existing international law could not be made to ﬁt it. The old rule that a warship must stop and board a merchantman



Chapter 29 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 1912–1916


Table 29.2 U.S. Exports to Belligerents, 1914–1916


Belligerent
Britain
France
Italy*
Germany








$594,271,863
159,818,924
74,235,012
344,794,276


$911,794,954
369,397,170
184,819,688
28,863,354


$1,526,685,102
628,851,988
269,246,105
288,899


1916 Figure as
 a Percentage of 1914 Figure 257% 0.08

 *Italy joined the Allies in April 1915.

 could hardly apply to submarines, which could easily be rammed or sunk if they surfaced. The cigar-shaped marauders posed a dire threat to the United States—so long as Wilson insisted on maintaining America’s neutral rights. Berlin ofﬁcials declared that they would try not to sink neutral shipping, but they warned that mistakes would probably occur. Wilson now determined on a policy of calculated risk. He would continue to claim proﬁtable neutral

20°W 70°N 10°W


 British military area

0°


 German submarine war zone N

Allied Powers


 ICELAND



Central Powers
 Neutral nations

400 Km.


400 Mi.


10°E


AT L A N T I C OCEAN

60°N


 NORWAY



20°E


 ic

B


 a

Y


 RM

 AN

NETH. BELG.

Lusitania
 torpedoed May 7, 1915

 DENMARK

 GE

50°N


North
Sea


 lt

UNITED KINGDOM

Sea


 SWEDEN

 trading rights, while hoping that no high-seas incident would force his hand to grasp the sword of war. Setting his peninsular jaw, he emphatically warned Germany that it would be held to “strict accountability” for any attacks on American vessels or citizens. The German submarines (known as U-boats, from the German Unterseeboot, or “undersea boat”) meanwhile began their deadly work. In the ﬁ rst months of 1915, they sank about ninety ships in the war zone. Then the submarine issue became acute when the British passenger liner Lusitania was torpedoed and sank off the coast of Ireland on May 7, 1915, with the loss of 1,198 lives, including 128 Americans. The Lusitania was carrying forty-two hundred cases of small-arms ammunition, a fact the Germans used to justify the sinking. But Americans were swept by a wave of shock and anger at this act of “mass murder” and “piracy.” The eastern United States, closer to the war, seethed with talk of ﬁghting, but the rest of the country showed a strong distaste for hostilities. The peace-loving Wilson had no stomach for leading a disunited nation into war. He well remembered the mistake in 1812 of his fellow Princetonian, James Madison. Instead, by a series of increasingly strong notes, Wilson attempted to bring the German warlords sharply to book. Even this mea sured approach was too

 The Fatherland, the chief German-American propaganda newspaper in the United States, cried,

 FRANCE

“


 SWITZ.

 Map 29.3 British Military Area (declared November 3, 1914) and German Submarine War Zone (declared February 4, 1915)

Interactive Map


 We [Americans] prattle about humanity while we manufacture poisoned shrapnel and picric acid for proﬁt. Ten thousand German widows, ten thousand orphans, ten thousand graves bear the legend ‘Made in America.’

”


American Neutrality




A
German U-boat This deadly new weapon rendered useless existing rules of naval warfare, eventually pushing the United States to declare war against Germany in 1917. 
 much for Secretary of State Bryan, who resigned rather than sign a protestation that might spell shooting. But Wilson resolutely stood his ground. “There is such a thing,” he declared, “as a man being too proud to ﬁght.” This kind of talk incensed the war-thirsty Theodore Roosevelt. The Rough Rider assailed the spineless simperers who heeded the “weasel words” of the paciﬁstic professor in the White House. Yet Wilson, sticking to his verbal guns, made some diplomatic progress. After another British liner, the Arabic, was sunk in August 1915, with the loss of two American lives, Berlin reluctantly agreed not to sink unarmed and unresisting passenger ships without warning.

 Advertisement from the New York Herald, May 1, 1915 Six days later the Lusitania was sunk. Note the German warning.



Chapter 29 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 1912–1916


Wilson Wins Reelection in 1916


 “Here’s Money for Your Americans. I May Drown Some More.” Germany expressed “profound regret” for the deaths of 128 Americans aboard the torpedoed passenger liner Lusitania in 1915, but the incident helped feed a mounting anti-German sentiment in the United States.

 This pledge appeared to be violated in March 1916, when the Germans torpedoed a French passenger steamer, the Sussex. The infuriated Wilson informed the Germans that unless they renounced the inhuman practice of sinking merchant ships without warning, he would break diplomatic relations—an almost certain prelude to war. Germany reluctantly knuckled under to President Wilson’s Sussex ultimatum, agreeing not to sink passenger ships and merchant vessels without giving warning. But the Germans attached a long string to their Sussex pledge: the United States would have to persuade the Allies to modify what Berlin regarded as their illegal blockade. This, obviously, was something that Washington could not do. Wilson promptly accepted the German pledge, without accepting the “string.” He thus won a temporary but precarious diplomatic victory—precarious because Germany could pull the string whenever it chose, and the president might suddenly ﬁ nd himself tugged over the cliff of war.

 Against this ominous backdrop, the presidential campaign of 1916 gathered speed. Both the bull moose Progressives and the Republicans met in Chicago. The Progressives uproariously renominated Theodore Roosevelt, but the Rough Rider, who loathed Wilson and all his works, had no stomach for splitting the Republicans again and ensuring the reelection of his hated rival. In refusing to run, he sounded the death knell of the Progressive party. Roosevelt’s Republican admirers also clamored for “Teddy,” but the Old Guard detested the renegade who had ruptured the party in 1912. Instead they drafted Supreme Court justice Charles Evans Hughes, a cold intellectual who had achieved a solid liberal record when he was governor of New York. The Republican platform condemned the Democratic tariff, assaults on the trusts, and Wilson’s wishy-washiness in dealing with Mexico and Germany. The thick-whiskered Hughes (“an animated feather duster”) left the bench for the campaign stump, where he was not at home. In anti-German areas of the country, he assailed Wilson for not standing up to the kaiser, whereas in isolationist areas he took a softer line. This fence-straddling operation led to the jeer “Charles Evasive Hughes.” Hughes was further plagued by Roosevelt, who was delivering a series of skin-’em-alive speeches against “that damned Presbyterian hypocrite Wilson.” Frothing for war, TR privately scoffed at Hughes as a “whiskered Wilson”; the only difference between the two, he said, was “a shave.” Wilson, nominated by acclamation at the Democratic convention in St. Louis, ignored Hughes on the theory that one should not try to murder a man who is committing suicide. His campaign was built on the slogan “He Kept Us Out of War.” Democratic orators warned that by electing Charles Evans Hughes, the nation would be electing a ﬁght— with a certain frustrated Rough Rider leading the charge. A Democratic advertisement appealing to the American working people read, You are Working; —Not Fighting! Alive and Happy; —Not Cannon Fodder! Wilson and Peace with Honor? or Hughes with Roosevelt and War?



The Campaign of 1916


 On election day Hughes swept the East and looked like a sureﬁ re winner. Wilson went to bed that night prepared to accept defeat, while the New York newspapers displayed huge portraits of “The PresidentElect—Charles Evans Hughes.” But the rest of the country turned the tide. Midwesterners and westerners, attracted by Wilson’s progressive reforms and antiwar policies, ﬂocked to the polls for the president. The ﬁ nal result, in doubt for several days, hinged on Cal i fornia, which Wilson carried by some 3,800 votes out of about a million cast. Wilson barely squeaked through, with a ﬁ nal vote of 277 to 254 in the Electoral College, and 9,127,695 to 8,533,507 in the popular column (see Map 29.4). The pro-labor Wilson received strong support from the working class and from renegade bull moosers, whom Republicans failed to lure back into their camp. Wilson

WA MT

OR ID NV CA

ND WY

 SD

 CO

 WI

 IA

 NE

 UT

 AZ

 MN

KS OK

 NM

 TX

 IL

MI IN

MO TN

AR LA

 OH 24 WV R-7/ D-1 KY

 MS

 AL

 GA

ME VT 4 NH MA NY 4 18 RI PA NJ CT 5 14 7 VA NC

DE MD

 SC

 FL

Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Wilson (Democrat)




52.2%


Popular Vote
9,127,695


51.7%


Hughes (Republican)




47.8%


8,533,507


48.3%


 Map 29.4 Presidential Election of 1916 (with electoral vote by state) Wilson was so worried about being a lame duck president in a time of great international tensions that he drew up a plan whereby Hughes, if victorious, would be appointed secretary of state, Wilson and the vice president would resign, and Hughes would thus succeed immediately to the presidency.

Interactive Map


 had not speciﬁcally promised to keep the country out of war, but probably enough voters relied on such implicit assurances to ensure his victory. Their hopeful expectations were soon rudely shattered.

 During the 1916 campaign, J. A. O’Leary, the head of a pro-German and pro-Irish organization, sent a scorching telegram to Wilson condemning him for having been pro-British in approving war loans and ammunition trafﬁc. Wilson shot back an answer:

“
 Theodore Roosevelt, War Hawk The former president clamored for American intervention in the European war, but the country preferred peace in 1916. Ironically, Roosevelt’s archrival, Woodrow Wilson, would take the country into the war just months after the 1916 election.

 Your telegram received. I would feel deeply mortiﬁed to have you or anybody like you vote for me. Since you have access to many disloyal Americans and I have not, I will ask you to convey this message to them.

”


 President Wilson’s devastating and somewhat insulting response probably won him more votes than it lost.



Chapter 29 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 1912–1916


 CHRONOLOGY

 Wilson defeats Taft and Roosevelt for presidency



Underwood Tariff Act
 Sixteenth Amendment (income tax) Federal Reserve Act Huerta takes power in Mexico Seventeenth Amendment (direct election of senators)



Clayton Anti-Trust Act
 Federal Trade Commission established U.S. seizes port of Veracruz, Mexico World War I begins in Europe





 Sussex ultimatum and pledge U.S. exports to European belligerents skyrocket Workingmen’s Compensation Act Federal Farm Loan Act Warehouse Act Adamson Act Pancho Villa raids New Mexico Brandeis appointed to Supreme Court Jones Act U.S. Marines sent to Dominican Republic Wilson defeats Hughes for presidency



 United States buys Virgin Islands from Denmark

 La Follette Seaman’s Act Lusitania torpedoed and sunk by German U-boat U.S. Marines sent to Haiti Germany declares submarine war area around British Isles

KEY TERMS
New Freedom (729) New Nationalism (729) Underwood Tariff (732) Federal Reserve Act (733) Federal Trade Commission Act (733) Clayton Anti-Trust Act (733) holding companies (733) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Workingmen’s Compensation Act (734) Adamson Act (734) Jones Act (734) Tampico Incident (737) Central Powers (738) Allies (738) U-boats (740) Lusitania (740) 
Herbert Croly
Louis D. Brandeis
Victoriano Huerta
Venustiano Carranza
Francisco (“Pancho”)
Villa


John (“Black Jack”)
Pershing
Charles Evans Hughes


Who Were the Progressives?


D


 ebate about progressivism has revolved mainly around a question that is simple to ask but devilishly difﬁcult to answer: who were the progressives? It was once taken for granted that progressive reformers were simply the heirs of the Jeffersonian-JacksonianPopulist reform crusades; they were the oppressed

 and downtrodden common folk who ﬁ nally erupted in wrath and demanded their due. But in his inﬂuential Age of Reform (1955), Richard Hofstadter astutely challenged that view. Progressive leaders, he argued, were not drawn from the ranks of society’s poor and marginalized. Rather, they were

To Learn More


 middle-class people threatened from above by the emerging power of new corporate elites and from below by a restless working class. It was not economic deprivation, but “status anxiety,” Hofstadter insisted, that prompted these people to become reformers. Their psychological motivation, Hofstadter concluded, rendered many of their reform efforts quirky and ineffectual. By contrast, “New Left” historians, notably Gabriel Kolko, argued that progressivism was dominated by established business leaders who successfully directed “reform” to their own conser vative ends. In this view government regulation (as embodied in new agencies like the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Tariff Commission, and in legislation like the Meat Inspection Act) simply accomplished what two generations of private efforts had failed to do: dampen cutthroat competition, stabilize markets, and make America safe for monopoly capitalism. Still other scholars, notably Robert H. Wiebe and Samuel P. Hays, argued that the progressives were neither the psychologically or economically disadvantaged nor the old capitalist elite, but were, rather, members of a rapidly emerging, self-conﬁdent social class possessed of the new techniques of scientiﬁc management, technological ex per tise, and orga ni zational know-how. This “orga ni zational school” of historians did not see progressivism as a struggle of the “people” against the “interests,” as a confused and nostalgic campaign by status-threatened reformers,



 or as a conser vative coup d’état. The progressive movement, in this view, was by and large an effort to rationalize and modernize many social institutions by introducing the wise and impartial hand of government regulation. This view had much to recommend it. Yet despite its widespread acceptance among historians, it could not adequately account for the titanic political struggles of the progressive era over the very reforms that the “orga ni zational school” regarded as simple adjustments to modernity. It also brushed over the deep philosophical differences that divided progressives themselves—such as between Roosevelt’s New Nationalism and Wilson’s New Freedom. In addition, the orga ni zational approach did not account for the important role of women in advocating progressive reforms, as demonstrated by Robyn Muncy, Linda Gordon, and Theda Skocpol. Building the American welfare state in the early twentieth century, they have argued, was fundamentally a gendered activity inspired by a “female dominion” of social workers and “social feminists.” Scholars such as Daniel T. Rodgers have added that essential inspiration also came from across the Atlantic. In European countries vibrant labor movements sought a welfare state to beneﬁt the working class, whereas in the United States the strength of female reformers promoted welfare programs aimed at protecting women and children. All the same, American programs frequently were modeled after policies adopted in London, Paris, and Berlin.

To Learn More
Michael C. Adams, The Great Adventure: Male Desire and
 the Coming of World War I (1990) John W. Chambers, The Tyranny of Change: America in the Progressive Era, 1900–1917 (rev. ed., 2000) John M. Cooper, The Warrior and the Priest: Woodrow Wilson and Theodore Roosevelt (1983) Alexander L. George and Juliette L. George, Woodrow Wilson and Colonel House (1956) Henry May, The End of American Innocence: A Study of the First Years of Our Time (1959) Frank A. Ninkovich, The Wilsonian Century: U.S. Foreign Policy Since 1900 (1999) Mary Renda, Taking Haiti: Military Occupation and the Culture of U.S. Imperialism, 1915–1940 (2001)

Edward Stettner, Shaping Modern Liberalism: Herbert Croly
 and Progressive Thought (1993) Philippa Strum, Brandeis: Justice for the People (1985) Eileen Welsome, The General and the Jaguar: Pershing’s Hunt for Pancho Villa (2006)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The War to End War





1917–1918
 The world must be made safe for democracy. Its peace must be planted upon the tested foundations of political liberty. We have no selﬁsh ends to serve. We desire no conquest, no dominion. We seek no indemnities for ourselves, no material compensation for the sacriﬁces we shall freely make.

D


 estiny dealt cruelly with Woodrow Wilson. The lover of peace, as fate would have it, was forced to lead a hesitant and peace-loving nation into war. As the last days of 1916 slipped through the hourglass, the president made one ﬁ nal, futile attempt to mediate between the embattled belligerents. On January 22, 1917, he delivered one of his most moving addresses, restating America’s commitment to neutral rights and declaring that only a negotiated “peace without victory” would prove durable. Germany’s warlords responded with a blow of the mailed ﬁst. On January 31, 1917, they announced to an astonished world their decision to wage unrestricted submarine warfare, sinking all ships, including America’s, in the war zone. Why this rash act? War with America was the last thing Germany wanted. But after three ghastly years in the trenches, Germany’s leaders decided the distinction between combatants and noncombatants was a

 luxury they could no longer afford. Thus they jerked on the string they had attached to their Sussex pledge in 1916, desperately hoping to bring Britain to its knees before the United States entered the war. Wilson, his bluff called, broke diplomatic relations with Germany but refused to move closer to war unless the Germans undertook “overt” acts against American lives.

War by Act of Germany
 To defend American interests short of war, the president asked Congress for authority to arm American merchant ships. When a band of midwestern senators launched a ﬁ libuster to block the mea sure, Wilson denounced them as a “little group of willful men” who were rendering a great nation “helpless and contemptible.” But their obstruction was a powerful reminder of the continuing strength of American isolationism.

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



A
War for Ideals 



WAR!
Attacks by German submarines ﬁnally forced Wilson’s hand, and he asked Congress for a declaration of war on April 2, 1917. Four days later, after considerable debate and with ﬁfty-six dissenting votes, Congress obliged the president. 
 Meanwhile, the sensational Zimmermann note was intercepted and published on March 1, 1917, infuriating Americans, especially westerners. German foreign secretary Arthur Zimmermann had secretly proposed a German-Mexican alliance, tempting antiYankee Mexico with veiled promises of recovering Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona. On the heels of this provocation came the longdreaded “overt” acts in the Atlantic, where German U-boats sank four unarmed American merchant vessels in the ﬁ rst two weeks of March. As one Philadelphia newspaper observed, “The difference between war and what we have now is that now we aren’t ﬁghting back.” Simultaneously came the rousing news that a revolution in Russia had toppled the cruel regime of the tsars. America could now ﬁght foursquare for democracy on the side of the Allies, without the black sheep of Russian despotism in the Allied fold. Subdued and solemn, Wilson at last stood before a hushed joint session of Congress on the evening of April 2, 1917, and asked for a declaration of war. He had lost his gamble that America could pursue the profits of neutral trade without being sucked into the ghastly maelstrom. A myth developed in later years that America was dragged unwittingly into war by munitions makers and Wall Street bankers, desperate to protect their proﬁts and loans. Yet the weapons merchants and ﬁ nanciers were already thriving, unhampered by wartime government restrictions and heavy taxation. Their slogan might well have been “Neutrality Forever.” The simple truth is that British harassment of Amer ican commerce had been galling but endurable; Germany had resorted to the mass kill ing of civilians. The difference was like that between a gang of

 thieves and a gang of murderers. President Wilson had drawn a clear, if risky, line against the depredations of the submarine. The German high command, in a last desperate throw of the dice, chose to cross it. In a ﬁgurative sense, America’s war declaration of April 6, 1917, bore the unambiguous trademark “Made in Germany.”

Wilsonian Idealism
Enthroned
 “It is a fearful thing to lead this great peaceful people into war,” Wilson said in his war message. It was fearful indeed, not least of all because of the formidable challenge it posed to Wilson’s leadership skills. Ironically, it fell to the scholarly Wilson, deeply respectful of American traditions, to shatter one of the most sacred of those traditions by entangling America in a distant European war. How could the president arouse the American people to shoulder this unprecedented burden? For more than a century, they had prided themselves on their isolationism from the periodic outbursts of militarized violence that afﬂ icted the Old World. Since 1914 their pride had been reinforced by the bountiful proﬁts gained through neutrality. German U-boats had now roughly shoved a wavering America into the abyss, but ominously, no fewer than six senators and ﬁ fty representatives (including the ﬁ rst congresswoman, Jeannette Rankin of Montana) had voted against the war resolution. Wilson could whip up no enthusiasm, especially in the landlocked Midwest, by calling on the nation to ﬁght to make the world safe from the submarine.



