 Sail, sail thy best, ship of Democracy, Of value is thy freight, ’tis not the Present only, The Past is also stored in thee, Thou holdest not the venture of thyself alone, not of the Western continent alone, Earth’s résumé entire floats on thy keel, O ship, is steadied by thy spars, With thee Time voyages in trust, the antecedent nations sink or swim with thee, With all their ancient struggles, martyrs, heroes, epics, wars, thou bear’st the other continents, Theirs, theirs as much as thine, the destination-port triumphant. . . . Walt Whitman Thou Mother with Thy Equal Brood, 1872

T HE
American Pageant 

 PART

 ONE

Founding the
New Nation





 ca. 33,000 B.C.E. –1783 C.E.

T


 he European explorers who followed Christopher Columbus to North America in the sixteenth century had no notion of founding a new nation. Neither did the ﬁrst European settlers who peopled the thirteen English colonies on the eastern shores of the continent in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. These original colonists may have ﬂed poverty or religious persecution in the Old World, but they continued to view themselves as Europeans, and as subjects of the Eng lish king. They regarded America as but the western rim of a transatlantic European world. Yet life in the New World made the colonists different from their European cousins, and eventually, during the American Revolution, the Americans came to embrace a vision of their country as an independent

 nation. How did this epochal transformation come about? How did the colonists overcome the conﬂ icts that divided them, unite against Britain, and declare themselves at great cost to be an “American” people? They had much in common to begin with. Most were Eng lishspeaking. Most came determined to create an agricultural society modeled on Eng lish customs. Conditions in the New World deepened their common bonds. Most colonists strove to live lives unfettered by the tyrannies of royal authority, ofﬁcial religion, and social hierarchies that they had left behind. They grew to cherish ideals that became synonymous with American life—reverence for individual liberty, self-government, religious tolerance, and economic opportunity. They also commonly

Algonquin Indians Fishing, by John White
 The English watercolorist accompanied the ﬁrst English expedition to Roanoke Island (later part of Virginia) in 1585. His paintings faithfully recorded the Indian way of life that was now imperiled by the arrival of the Europeans.

Founding the New Nation


 displayed a willingness to subjugate outsiders—ﬁrst Indians, who were nearly annihilated through war and disease, and then Africans, who were brought in chains to serve as slave labor, especially on the tobacco, rice, and indigo plantations of the southern colonies. But if the settlement experience gave people a common stock of values, both good and bad, it also divided them. The thirteen colonies were quite different from one another. Puritans carved tight, pious, and relatively democratic communities of small family farms out of rocky-soiled New Eng land. Theirs was a homogeneous world in comparison to most of the southern colonies, where large landholders, mostly Anglicans, built plantations along the coast from which they lorded over a labor force of black slaves and looked down upon the poor white farmers who settled the backcountry. Different still were the middle colonies stretching from New York to Delaware. There diversity reigned. Well-to-do merchants put their stamp on New York City, as Quakers did on Philadelphia, while out in the countryside sprawling estates were interspersed with modest homesteads. Within individual colonies, conﬂ icts festered over economic interests, ethnic rivalries, and religious practices. All those clashes made it difﬁcult for colonists to imagine that they were a single people with a common destiny, much less that they ought to break free from Britain. The American colonists in fact had little reason to complain about Britain. Each of the thirteen colonies enjoyed a good deal of self-rule. Many colonists proﬁted from trade within the British Empire. But by the 1760s,



 this stable arrangement began to crumble, a victim of the imperial rivalry between France and Britain. Their struggle for supremacy in North America began in the late seventeenth century and ﬁ nally dragged in the colonists during the French and Indian War from 1756 to 1763. That war in one sense strengthened ties with Britain, since colonial militias fought triumphantly alongside the British army against their mutual French and Indian enemies. But once the French were driven from the North American continent, the colonists no longer needed Britain for protection. More important still, after 1763 a ﬁ nancially overstretched British government made the fateful choice of imposing taxes on colonies that had been accustomed to answering mainly to their own colonial assemblies. By the 1770s issues of taxation, self-rule, and trade restrictions brought the crisis of imperial authority to a head. Although as late as 1775 most people in the colonies clung to the hope of some kind of accommodation short of outright independence, royal intransigence soon thrust the colonists into a war of independence that neither antagonist could have anticipated just a few years before. Eight years of revolutionary war did more than anything in the colonial past to bring Americans together as a nation. Comradeship in arms and the struggle to shape a national government forced Americans to subdue their differences as best they could. But the spirit of national unity was hardly universal. One in ﬁve colonists sided with the British as “Loyalists,” and a generation would pass before the wounds of this ﬁrst American “civil war” fully healed. Yet in the end, Americans won the Revolution, with no small measure of help from the French, because in every colony people shared a ﬁ rm belief that they were ﬁghting for the “unalienable rights” of “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness,” in the words of Thomas Jefferson’s magniﬁcent Declaration of Independence. Almost two hundred years of living a new life had prepared Americans to found a new nation.

Philadelphia, Corner of Second and High
Streets Delegates to the Constitutional
 Convention in 1787 gathered in Philadelphia, the largest city in North America, a vivid symbol of the rise of American society from its precarious beginnings at Jamestown and Plymouth nearly two centuries earlier.

New World Beginnings





33,000 B.C.E. –1769 C.E.
 I have come to believe that this is a mighty continent which was hitherto unknown. . . . Your Highnesses have an Other World here.

S


 everal billion years ago, that whirling speck of dust known as the earth, ﬁ fth in size among the planets, came into being. About six thousand years ago—only a minute in geological time—recorded history of the Western world began. Certain peoples of the Middle East, developing a written culture, gradually emerged from the haze of the past. Five hundred years ago—only a few seconds ﬁguratively speaking—European explorers stumbled on the Americas. This dramatic accident forever altered the future of both the Old World and the New, and of Africa and Asia as well.

The Shaping of North America
 Planet earth took on its present form slowly. Some 225 million years ago, a single supercontinent contained all the world’s dry land. Then enormous chunks of terrain began to drift away from this colossal landmass, opening the Atlantic and Indian Oceans, narrowing the Paciﬁc Ocean, and forming the great continents of Eurasia, Af-

 rica, Australia, Antarctica, and the Americas. The existence of a single original continent has been proved in part by the discovery of nearly identical species of ﬁsh that swim today in long-separated freshwater lakes throughout the world. Continued shifting and folding of the earth’s crust thrust up mountain ranges. The Appalachians were probably formed even before continental separation, perhaps 350 million years ago. The majestic ranges of western North America—the Rockies, the Sierra Nevada, the Cascades, and the Coast Ranges—arose much more recently, geologically speaking, some 135 million to 25 million years ago. They are truly “American” mountains, born after the continent took on its own separate geological identity. By about 10 million years ago, nature had sculpted the basic geological shape of North America. The continent was anchored in its northeastern corner by the massive Canadian Shield—a zone undergirded by ancient rock, probably the ﬁrst part of what became the North American landmass to have emerged above sea level. A narrow eastern coastal plain, or “tidewater” region, creased by many river valleys, sloped gently up-

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



The Effects of the Great Ice Age




4–8 B.C.


RECORDED HISTORY BEGINS

JESUS BORN



VIRGINIA FOUNDED





VIRGINIA BICENFOUNDED TENNIAL





 169 years

 169 years

 115 years

COLUMBUS'S DISCOVERY

4000 B.C.


INDEPENDENCE DECLARED

 ward to the timeworn ridges of the Appalachians. Those ancient mountains slanted away on their western side into the huge midcontinental basin that rolled downward to the Mississippi Valley bottom and then rose relentlessly to the towering peaks of the Rockies. From the Rocky Mountain crest—the “roof of America”—the land fell off jaggedly into the intermountain Great Basin, bounded by the Rockies on the east and the Sierra and Cascade ranges on the west. The valleys of the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers and the Willamette– Puget Sound trough seamed the interiors of present-day Cal i fornia, Oregon, and Washington. The land at last met the foaming Paciﬁc, where the Coast Ranges rose steeply from the sea. Nature laid a chill hand over much of this terrain in the Great Ice Age, beginning about 2 million years ago. Two-mile-thick ice sheets crept from the polar regions to blanket parts of Europe, Asia, and the Americas. In North America the great glaciers carpeted most of present-day Canada and the United States as far southward as a line stretching from Pennsylvania through the Ohio Country and the Dakotas to the Paciﬁc Northwest. When the glaciers ﬁ nally retreated about 10,000 years ago, they left the North American landscape transformed, and much as we know it today. The weight of the gargantuan ice mantle had depressed the level of the Canadian Shield. The grinding and ﬂushing action of the moving and melting ice had scoured away the shield’s topsoil, pitting its rocky surface with thousands of shallow depressions into which the melting glaciers ﬂowed to form lakes. The same glacial action scooped out and ﬁ lled the Great Lakes. They originally drained southward through the Mississippi River system to the Gulf of Mexico. When the melting ice unblocked the Gulf of St. Lawrence, the lake water sought the St. Lawrence River outlet to the Atlantic Ocean, lowering the Great Lakes’ level and leaving the Missouri-



1991 2000


 46 years

WORLD WAR II ENDS

 9 years

COLD WAR ENDS

NEW MILLENNIUM BEGINS

 Mississippi-Ohio system to drain the enormous midcontinental basin between the Appalachians and the Rockies. Similarly, in the West, water from the melting glaciers ﬁ lled sprawling Lake Bonneville, covering much of present-day Utah, Nevada, and Idaho. It drained to the Paciﬁc Ocean through the Snake and Columbia River systems until diminishing rainfall from the ebbing ice cap lowered the water level, cutting off access to the Snake River outlet. Deprived of both inﬂow and drainage, the giant lake became a gradually shrinking inland sea. It grew increasingly saline, slowly evaporated, and left an arid, mineral-rich desert. Only the Great Salt Lake remained as a relic of Bonneville’s former vastness. Today Lake Bonneville’s ancient beaches are visible on mountainsides up to 1,000 feet above the dry ﬂoor of the Great Basin.

Peopling the Americas
 The Great Ice Age shaped more than the geological history of North America. It also contributed to the origins of the continent’s human history. Though recent (and still highly controversial) evidence suggests that some early peoples may have reached the Americas in crude boats, most probably came by land. Some 35,000 years ago, the Ice Age congealed much of the world oceans into massive ice-pack glaciers, lowering the level of the sea. As the sea level dropped, it exposed a land bridge connecting Eurasia with North America in the area of the present-day Bering Sea between Siberia and Alaska. Across that bridge, probably following migratory herds of game, ventured small bands of nomadic Asian hunters—the “immigrant” ancestors of the Native Americans. They continued to trek across the Bering isthmus for some 250 centuries, slowly peopling the American continents (see Map 1.1).

°N


ARCTIC OCEAN



BERING LAND BRIDGE

40°E


Ci
 r cl e

160°E


 c cti Ar

180°
°N




20°E


160°W


0°


N


40°
140°W


AT L A N T I C O C EA N
r 
 f Cance

Tropic o


20°N
120°W


100°W


PAC I F IC OC EA N
Equator 0° 
20°W


N
20°S
Tropic of Capricorn




40°S


500 1000 Km.


1000 Mi.


 Extent of land, ca. 33,000 –10,500 B.C.E. Glaciers, ca. 15,000 B.C.E. Probable ancient shoreline Probable migratory route

80°W


60°W


 Map 1.1 The First Discoverers of America The origins of the ﬁrst Americans remain something of a mystery. According to the most plausible theory of how the Americas were populated, for some 25,000 years people crossed the Bering land bridge from Eurasia to North America. Gradually they dispersed southward down ice-free valleys, populating both the American continents.

40°W


 Selected Paleo-Indian site

Interactive Map


Making Sense of the New World
 his map from 1546 by Sebastian Münster represents one of the earliest efforts to make geographic sense out of the New World (Nouus Orbis and Die Nůw Welt on the map). The very phrase New World suggests just how staggering a blow to the European imagination was the discovery of the Americas. Europeans reached instinctively for the most expansive of all possible terms—world, not simply places, or even continents—to comprehend Columbus’s startling report that lands and peoples previously unimagined lay beyond the horizon of Europe’s western sea. Gradually the immense implications of the New World’s existence began to impress themselves on Europe, with consequences for literature, art, politics, the economy, and, of course, cartography. Maps

T


 can only be representations of reality and are therefore necessarily distortions. This map bears a recognizable resemblance to modern mapmakers’ renderings of the American continents, but it also contains gross geographic inaccuracies (note the location of Japan—Zipangri—relative to the North American west coast) as well as telling commentaries on what sixteenth-century Europeans found remarkable (note the Land of Giants—Regio Gigantum—and the indication of cannibals— Canibali—in present-day Argentina and Brazil, respectively). What further clues to the European mentality of the time does the map offer? In what ways might misconceptions about the geography of the Americas have inﬂuenced further exploration and settlement patterns?





 Chapter 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000 b.c.e.–1769 c.e.

 As the Ice Age ended and the glaciers melted, the sea level rose again, inundating the land bridge about 10,000 years ago. Nature thus barred the door to further immigration for many thousands of years, leaving this part of the human family marooned for millennia on the now-isolated American continents. Time did not stand still for these original Americans. The same climatic warming that melted the ice and drowned the bridge to Eurasia gradually opened ice-free valleys through which vanguard bands groped their way southward and eastward across the Americas. Roaming slowly through this awesome wilderness, they eventually reached the far tip of South America, some 15,000 miles from Siberia. By the time Europeans arrived in America in 1492, perhaps 54 million people inhabited the two American continents.* Over the centuries they split into countless tribes, evolved more than 2,000 separate languages, and developed many diverse religions, cultures, and ways of life. Incas in Peru, Mayans in Central America, and Aztecs in Mexico shaped stunningly sophisticated civilizations. Their advanced agricultural practices, based primarily on the cultivation of maize, which is Indian corn, fed large populations, perhaps as many as 20 million in Mexico alone. Although without large draft animals such as horses and oxen, and lacking even the simple technology of the wheel, these peoples built elaborate cities and carried on far-ﬂung commerce. Talented mathematicians, they made strikingly accurate astronomical observations. The Aztecs also routinely sought the favor of their gods by offering human sacriﬁces, cutting the hearts out of the chests of living victims, who were often captives conquered in battle. By some accounts more than 5,000 people were ritually slaughtered to celebrate the crowning of one Aztec chieftain.

The Earliest Americans
 Agriculture, especially corn growing, accounted for the size and sophistication of the Native American civilizations in Mexico and South America. About 5000 b.c.e. hunter-gatherers in highland Mexico developed a wild

 *Much controversy surrounds estimates of the pre-Columbian Native American population. The ﬁgures here are from William M. Denevan, ed., The Native Population of the Americas in 1492, rev. ed. (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1992).

Corn Culture
 This statue of a corn goddess from the Moche culture of present-day coastal Peru, made between 200 and 600 B.C.E. vividly illustrates the centrality of corn to native American peoples, a thousand years before the rise of the great Incan and Aztec empires that the Europeans later encountered.

 grass into the staple crop of corn, which became their staff of life and the foundation of the complex, largescale, centralized Aztec and Incan civilizations that eventually emerged. Cultivation of corn spread across the Americas from the Mexican heartland. Everywhere it was planted, corn began to transform nomadic hunting bands into settled agricultural villagers, but this process went forward slowly and unevenly. Corn planting reached the present-day American Southwest as early as 2000 b.c.e. and powerfully molded Pueblo culture. The Pueblo peoples in the Rio Grande valley constructed intricate irrigation systems to water their cornﬁelds. They were dwelling in villages of multistoried, terraced buildings when Spanish explorers made contact with them in the sixteenth century. (Pueblo means “village” in Spanish.) Corn cultivation reached other parts of North America considerably later. The timing of its arrival in dif ferent localities explains much about the relative rates of development of different Native American peoples (see Map 1.2). Throughout the continent to the north and east of the land of the Pueblos, social life was less elaborately developed—indeed “societies” in the modern sense of the word scarcely existed. No dense concentrations of population or complex nation-states comparable to the Aztec empire existed in North America outside of Mexico at the time of the Europeans’ arrival—one of the reasons for the relative ease with which the European colonizers subdued the native North Americans. The Mound Builders of the Ohio River valley, the Mississippian culture of the lower Midwest, and the desert-dwelling Anasazi peoples of the Southwest did

ESKIMO ESKIMO

 tic Arc rcle Ci

YUPIK 160°W ALEUT

40°W


 DOGRIB

ARCTIC YELLOWKNIFE

°N




 INUIT

 TLINGIT

Hudson
Bay


CHIPEWYA 140°W

 SUBARCTIC

 HAIDA

NORTHWEST COAST

 CREE

 CREE

 CREE

 MONTAGNAIS

 CREE

OJIBWA CREE

 BLACKFEET

 MICMAC

P L ATEAU

 MAKAH

 OJIBWA

ASSINIBOINE
Great ALGONQUIN C ABENAKI CHINOOK olum SPOKANE issouri R. Lakes COEUR FLATHEAD M bia R. OJIBWA TILLAMOOK D’ALENE MANDAN CROW CAYUSE NEZ HURON MENOMINEE MASSACHUSETT PERCE IROQUOIS ARIKARA POTAWATOMI WINNEBAGO NARRAGANSETT SIOUX M SHOSHONE SAUK MODOC i ERIE CHEYENNE YUROK NORTHEAST FOX SIOUX KICKAPOO DELAWARE PAIUTE HUPA SHOSHONE MIAMI G R EAT P LA I NS SUSQUEHANNA YUKI MAIDU GREAT BASIN SHAWNEE IOWA LENAPE ILLINOIS POMO WASHO ARAPAHO PAWNEE R. POWHATAN SHOSHONE . MISSOURI o hi oR MIWOK CHICKAHOMINY KANSA Arka ad UTE r MONO n sas R. PAIUTE olo TUSCARORA C OSAGE KIOWA CALIFORNIA NAVAJO APACHE CHEROKEE CATAWBA HOPI PUEBLO CHUMASH MOHAVE CREEK QUAPAW ZUNI CHICKASAW APACHE CADDO COMANCHE ALABAMA SOUTHEAST WICHITA APACHE CHOCTAW 120°W PIMA NATCHEZ KILIWA TIMUCUA 
60°W


°N




 is ss

O


 sippi R.

PAC I F I C O C E A N

 BEOTHUK

 CREE

KWAKIUTL NOOTKA

 INUIT

AT L A N T I C O C E A N

 o Ri

 a Gr

 de

 n

 PIMA

 KARANKAWA

S OUTHWEST



N


Gulf of
Mexico


 ic Trop

 TAINO 600 Mi.

 Tribal location SIOUX at time of contact Modern boundaries, for reference

 r

 ance

 of C

20°N


 CIBONEY

600 Km.


 CALUSA

CARIBBEAN AZTEC

Caribbean Sea


MESOAMERICA 100°W

80°W


 Map 1.2 North American Indian Peoples at the Time of First Contact with Europeans Because this map depicts the location of various Indian peoples at the time of their ﬁrst contact with Europeans, and because initial contacts ranged from the sixteenth to the nineteenth centuries, it is necessarily subject to considerable chronological skewing and is only a crude approximation of the “original” territory of any given group. The map also cannot capture the ﬂuidity and dynamism of Native American life even before Columbus’s “discovery.” For example, the Navajo and Apache peoples had migrated from present-day northern Canada only shortly before the Spanish ﬁ rst encountered them in the present-day American Southwest in the 1500s. The map also places the Sioux on the Great Plains, where Europeans met up with them in the early nineteenth century—but the Sioux had spilled onto the plains not long before then from the forests surrounding the Great Lakes. The indigenous populations of the southeastern and mid-Atlantic regions are especially difﬁcult to represent accurately in a map like this because pre-Columbian intertribal conﬂicts had so scrambled the native inhabitants that it is virtually impossible to determine which groups were originally where. Interactive Map





 Chapter 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000 b.c.e.–1769 c.e.

 Cahokia This artist’s rendering of Cahokia, based on archaeological excavations, shows the huge central square and the imposing Monk’s Mound, which rivaled in size the pyramids of Egypt.

 sustain some large settlements after the incorporation of corn planting into their ways of life during the ﬁrst millennium c.e. The Mississippian settlement at Cahokia, near present-day East St. Louis, was at one time home to as many as twenty-ﬁve thousand people. The Anasazis built an elaborate pueblo of more than six hundred interconnected rooms at Chaco Canyon in modern-day New Mexico. But mysteriously, perhaps due to prolonged drought, all those ancient cultures fell into decline by about 1300 c.e. The cultivation of maize, as well as of high-yielding strains of beans and squash, reached the southeastern Atlantic seaboard region of North America about 1000 c.e. These plants made possible three-sister farming, with beans growing on the trellis of the cornstalks and squash covering the planting mounds to retain moisture in the soil. The rich diet provided by this environmentally clever farming technique produced some of the highest population densities on the continent, among them the Creek, Choctaw, and Cherokee peoples. The Iroquois in the northeastern woodlands, inspired by a legendary leader named Hiawatha, created in the sixteenth century perhaps the closest North American approximation to the great empires of Mexico and Peru. The Iroquois Confederacy developed the political and orga ni zational skills to sustain a robust military alliance that menaced its neighbors, Native

 American and European alike, for well over a century (see “Makers of America: The Iroquois,” pp. 42–43). But for the most part, the native peoples of North America were living in small, scattered, and impermanent settlements on the eve of the Europeans’ arrival. In more settled agricultural groups, women tended the crops while men hunted, ﬁshed, gathered fuel, and cleared ﬁelds for planting. This pattern of life frequently conferred substantial authority on women, and many North American native peoples, including the Iroquois, developed matrilineal cultures, in which power and possessions passed down the female side of the family line. Unlike the Europeans, who would soon arrive with the presumption that humans had dominion over the earth and with the technologies to alter the very face of the land, the Native Americans had neither the desire nor the means to manipulate nature aggressively. They revered the physical world and endowed nature with spiritual properties. Yet they did sometimes ignite massive forest ﬁ res, deliberately torching thousands of acres of trees to create better hunting habitats, especially for deer. This practice accounted for the open, parklike appearance of the eastern woodlands that so amazed early European explorers. But in a broad sense, the land did not feel the hand of the Native Americans heavy upon it, partly because they were so few in number. They were so thinly spread

Early Explorers


 across the continent that vast areas were virtually untouched by a human presence. In the fateful year 1492, probably no more than 4 million Native Americans padded through the whispering, primeval forests and paddled across the sparkling, virgin waters of the continent north of Mexico. They were blissfully unaware that the historic isolation of the Americas was about to end forever, as the land and the native peoples alike felt the full shock of the European “discovery.”

Indirect Discoverers
 of the New World Europeans, for their part, were equally unaware of the existence of the Americas. Blond-bearded Norse seafarers from Scandinavia had chanced upon the northeastern shoulder of North America about 1000 c.e. They landed at a place near L’Anse aux Meadows in presentday Newfoundland that abounded in wild grapes, which led them to name the spot Vinland. But no strong nation-state, yearning to expand, supported these venturesome voyagers. Their ﬂ imsy settlements consequently were soon abandoned, and their discovery was forgotten, except in Scandinavian saga and song. For several centuries thereafter, other restless Europeans, with the growing power of ambitious governments behind them, sought contact with a wider world, whether for conquest or trade. They thus set in motion the chain of events that led to a drive toward Asia, the penetration of Africa, and the completely accidental discovery of the New World. Christian crusaders must rank high among America’s indirect discoverers. Clad in shining armor, tens of thousands of these European warriors tried from the eleventh to the fourteenth century to wrest the Holy Land from Muslim control. Foiled in their military assaults, the crusaders nevertheless acquired a taste for the exotic delights of Asia. Goods that had been virtually unknown in Europe now were craved—silk for cloth ing, drugs for aching ﬂesh, perfumes for unbathed bodies, colorful draperies for gloomy castles, and spices— especially sugar, a rare luxury in Europe before the crusades—for preserving and ﬂavoring food. Europe’s developing sweet tooth would have momentous implications for world history. The luxuries of the East were prohibitively expensive in Europe. They had to be transported enormous distances from the Spice Islands (Indonesia), China, and India, in creaking ships and on swaying camel-



 back. The journey led across the Indian Ocean, the Persian Gulf, and the Red Sea or along the tortuous caravan routes of Asia or the Arabian Peninsula, ending at the ports of the eastern Mediterranean (see Map 1.3). Muslim middlemen exacted a heavy toll en route. By the time the strange-smelling goods reached Italian merchants at Venice and Genoa, they were so costly that purchasers and proﬁts alike were narrowly limited. European consumers and distributors were naturally eager to ﬁ nd a less expensive route to the riches of Asia or to develop alternate sources of supply.

Europeans Enter Africa
 European appetites were further whetted when footloose Marco Polo, an Italian adventurer, returned to Europe in 1295 and began telling tales of his nearly twenty-year sojourn in China. Though he may in fact never have seen China (legend to the contrary, the hard evidence is sketchy), he must be regarded as an indirect discoverer of the New World, for his book, with its descriptions of rose-tinted pearls and golden pagodas, stimulated European desires for a cheaper route to the trea sures of the East. These accumulating pressures eventually brought a breakthrough for European expansion. Before the middle of the ﬁ fteenth century, European sailors refused to sail southward along the coast of West Africa because they could not beat their way home against the prevailing northerly winds and south-ﬂowing currents. About 1450, Portuguese mariners overcame those obstacles. Not only had they developed the caravel, a ship that could sail more closely into the wind, but they had discovered that they could return to Europe by sailing northwesterly from the African coast toward the Azores, where the prevailing westward breezes would carry them home. The new world of sub-Saharan Africa now came within the grasp of questing Europeans. The northern shore of Africa, as part of the Mediterranean world, had been known to Europe since antiquity. But because sea travel down the African coast had been virtually impossible, Africa south of the forbidding Sahara Desert barrier had remained remote and mysterious. African gold, perhaps two-thirds of Europe’s supply, crossed the Sahara on camelback, and shadowy tales may have reached Europe about the ﬂourishing West African kingdom of Mali in the Niger River valley, with its impressive Islamic university at Timbuktu. But Europeans



 Chapter 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000 b.c.e.–1769 c.e.

150°W


120°W


90°W


30°W


60°W


0°


60°E


30°E


90°E


150°E


120°E


GREENLAND
Arctic Circle 
Iceland


60°N


 ENGLAND

Genoa


 PORTUGAL

NORTH AMERICA

Venice
Constantinople


 SPAIN

Azores


 ASIA

E UR O P E


 FRANCE

JAPAN PERSI A

Canary Is.


30°N


Beijing
Hangzhou
Delhi


Alexandria
Tropic of Cancer
Cape


A T L A N T I C
Verde Is.
 OCEAN

SA H A R A M ALI

A RABI A

C H IN A
 INDIA

Timbuktu


 AFRICA 0° Equator

PACIFIC OCEAN

PACIFIC OCEAN

Guangzhou
(Canton)


Malacca


Spice
Islands


 Príncipe São Tomé

SOUTH AMERICA
Madagascar 
INDIAN OCEAN

Tropic of Capricorn


AUS TRALIA

30°S


N




 The world known to Europe, 1492 60°S Antarctic Circle

3000 Km.


3000 Mi.


 Portuguese exploration

The Silk Road


 Díaz, 1488

 Other land trade routes

 da Gama, 1498

 Ocean trade routes

 Prevailing wind

 Map 1.3 The World Known to Europe and Major Trade Routes with Asia, 1492 Goods on the early routes passed through so many hands along the way that their ultimate source remained mysterious to Europeans.

 had no direct access to sub-Saharan Africa until the Portuguese navigators began to creep down the West African coast in the middle of the ﬁ fteenth century. The Portuguese promptly set up trading posts along the African shore for the purchase of gold—and slaves. Arab ﬂesh merchants and Africans themselves had traded slaves for centuries before the Europeans arrived. The slavers routinely charged higher prices for captives from distant sources, because they could not easily ﬂee to their native villages or be easily rescued by their kin. Slave brokers also deliberately separated persons from the same tribes and mixed unlike people together to frustrate orga nized resistance. Thus from its



Interactive Map


 earliest days, slavery by its very nature inhibited the expression of regional African cultures and tribal identities. The Portuguese adopted these Arab and African practices. They built up their own systematic trafﬁc in slaves to work the sugar plantations that Portugal, and later Spain, established on the African coastal islands of Madeira, the Canaries, São Tomé, and Principe. The Portuguese appetite for slaves was enormous and dwarfed the modest scale of the pre-European trafﬁc. Slave trading became a big business. Some forty thousand Africans were carried away to the Atlantic sugar islands in the last half of the ﬁ fteenth century. Millions

European Trade and Exploration




 Marco Polo Passing Through the Strait of Hormuz This illustration, from the ﬁrst printed edition of The Travels of Marco Polo in 1477, shows the traveler crossing the Persian Gulf between the Arabian Peninsula and Persia (presentday Iran).

 more were to be wrenched from their home continent after the discovery of the Americas. In these ﬁ fteenthcentury Portuguese adventures in Africa were to be found the origins of the modern plantation system, based on large-scale commercial agriculture and the wholesale exploitation of slave labor. This kind of plantation economy would shape the destiny of much of the New World. The seafaring Portuguese pushed still farther southward in search of the water route to Asia. Edging cautiously down the African coast, Bartholomeu Dias rounded the southernmost tip of the “Dark Continent” in 1488. Ten years later Vasco da Gama ﬁ nally reached India (hence the name “Indies,” given by Europeans to all the mysterious lands of the Orient) and returned

 home with a small but tantalizing cargo of jewels and spices. Meanwhile, the kingdom of Spain became united— an event pregnant with destiny—in the late ﬁ fteenth century. This new unity resulted primarily from the marriage of two sovereigns, Ferdinand of Aragon and Isabella of Castile, and from the brutal expulsion of the “inﬁdel” Muslim Moors from Spain after centuries of Christian-Islamic warfare. Glorying in their sudden strength, the Spaniards were eager to outstrip their Portuguese rivals in the race to tap the wealth of the Indies. To the south and east, Portugal controlled the African coast and thus controlled the gateway to the round-Africa water route to India. Of necessity, therefore, Spain looked westward.



 Chapter 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000 b.c.e.–1769 c.e.

 Columbus Comes upon a New World

 Gorée Island Slave Fortress From this holding station off the coast of Senegal, thousands of African captives passed through the “Door of No Return” into a lifetime of slavery in the New World.

 The stage was now set for a cataclysmic shift in the course of history—the history not only of Europe but of all the world. Europeans clamored for more and cheaper products from the lands beyond the Mediterranean. Africa had been established as a source of cheap slave labor for plantation agriculture. The Portuguese voyages had demonstrated the feasibility of long-range ocean navigation. In Spain a modern national state was taking shape, with the unity, wealth, and power to shoulder the formidable tasks of discovery, conquest, and colonization. The dawn of the Renaissance in the fourteenth century nurtured an ambitious spirit of optimism and adventure. Printing presses, introduced about 1450, facilitated the spread of scientiﬁc knowledge. The mariner’s compass, possibly borrowed from the Arabs, eliminated some of the uncertainties of sea travel. Meanwhile, across the ocean, the unsuspecting New World innocently awaited its European “discoverers.” Onto this stage stepped Christopher Columbus. This skilled Italian seafarer persuaded the Spanish monarchs to outﬁt him with three tiny but seaworthy ships, manned by a motley crew. Daringly, he unfurled the sails of his cockleshell craft and headed westward. His superstitious sailors, fearful of venturing into the oceanic unknown, grew increasingly mutinous. After six weeks at sea, failure loomed until, on October 12, 1492, the crew sighted an island in the Bahamas. A new world thus swam within the vision of Europeans.

The Impact of Discovery




 nished the labor; and the New World offered its raw materials, especially its precious metals and its soil for the cultivation of sugar cane. For Europeans as well as for Africans and Native Americans, the world after 1492 would never be the same, for better or worse.

When Worlds Collide


Christopher Columbus (1451–1506), by Ridolfo di
 Domenico Ghirlandaio No portrait from life exists of Columbus, so all likenesses of him, including this one, are somewhat fanciful.

 Columbus’s sensational achievement obscures the fact that he was one of the most successful failures in history. Seeking a new water route to the fabled Indies, he in fact had bumped into an enormous land barrier blocking the ocean pathway. For decades thereafter explorers strove to get through it or around it. The truth gradually dawned that sprawling new continents had been discovered. Yet Columbus was at ﬁ rst so certain that he had skirted the rim of the “Indies” that he called the native peoples Indians, a gross geographical misnomer that somehow stuck. Columbus’s discovery would eventually convulse four continents—Europe, Africa, and the two Americas. Thanks to his epochal voyage, an interdependent global economic system emerged on a scale undreamedof before he set sail. Its workings touched every shore washed by the Atlantic Ocean. Europe provided the markets, the capital, and the technology; Africa fur-

 Two ecosystems—the fragile, naturally evolved networks of relations among organisms in a stable environment— commingled and clashed when Columbus waded ashore. The reverberations from that historic encounter—often called the Columbian exchange (see Figure 1.1)—echoed for centuries after 1492. The ﬂora and fauna of the Old and New Worlds had been separated for thousands of years. European explorers marveled at the strange sights that greeted them, including exotic beasts such as iguanas and “snakes with castanets” (rattlesnakes). Native New World plants such as tobacco, maize, beans, tomatoes, and especially the lowly potato eventually revolutionized the international economy as well as the European diet, feeding the rapid population growth of the Old World. These foodstuffs were among the most important Indian gifts to the Europeans and to the rest of the world. Perhaps three-ﬁfths of the crops cultivated around the globe today originated in the Americas. Ironically, the introduction into Africa of New World foodstuffs like maize, manioc, and sweet potatoes may have fed an African population boom that numerically, though not morally, more than offset the losses inﬂicted by the slave trade. In exchange the Europeans introduced Old World crops and animals to the Americas. Columbus returned to the Caribbean island of Hispaniola (present-day Haiti and the Dominican Republic) in 1493 with seventeen ships that unloaded twelve hundred men and a virtual Noah’s Ark of cattle, swine, and horses. The horses soon reached the North American mainland through Mex ico and in less than two centuries had spread as far as Canada. North American Indian tribes like the Apaches, Sioux, and Blackfeet swiftly adopted the horse, transforming their cultures into highly mobile, wide-ranging hunter societies that roamed the grassy Great Plains in pursuit of the shaggy buffalo. Columbus also brought seedlings of sugar cane, which thrived in the warm Car ibbean climate. A “sugar revolution” consequently took place in the European diet, fueled by the forced migration of millions of Africans to work the caneﬁelds and sugar mills of the New World.



 Chapter 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000 b.c.e.–1769 c.e.

 Gold, silver

 Corn, potatoes, pineapples, tomatoes, tobacco, beans, vanilla, chocolate

Syphilis
OLD WORLD NEW WORLD

 Wheat, sugar, rice, coffee

 Horses, cows, pigs

 Smallpox, measles, bubonic plague, influenza, typhus, diphtheria, scarlet fever

 Slave labor

 AFRICA

 Figure 1.1 The Columbian Exchange Columbus’s discovery initiated the kind of explosion in international commerce that a later age would call “globalization.” (Source: Adapted from Out of Many: A History of the American People, Third Edition, Combined Edition by Faragher, Buhle, Czitrom, and Armitage. Copyright © 1999. By permission of Prentice-Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.)

 Unwittingly, the Europeans also brought other organisms in the dirt on their boots and the dust on their clothes, such as the seeds of Kentucky bluegrass, dandelions, and daisies. Most ominous of all, in their bodies they carried the germs that caused smallpox, yellow fever, and malaria. Indeed Old World diseases would quickly devastate the Native Americans. During the Indians’ millennia of isolation in the Americas, most of the Old World’s killer maladies had disappeared from among them. But generations of freedom from those illnesses had also wiped out protective antibodies. Devoid of natural resistance to Old World sicknesses, Indians died in droves. Within ﬁ fty years of the Spanish arrival, the population of the Taino natives in Hispaniola dwindled from some 1 million people to about 200. Enslavement and armed aggression took their toll, but the deadliest killers were microbes, not muskets. The lethal germs spread among the New World peoples with the speed and force of a hurricane, swiftly sweeping far ahead of the human invaders; most of those afﬂ icted

 never laid eyes on a European. In the centuries after Columbus’s landfall, as many as 90 percent of the Native Americans perished, a demographic catastrophe without parallel in human history. This depopulation was surely not intended by the Spanish, but it was nevertheless so severe that entire cultures and ancient ways of life were extinguished forever. Bafﬂed, enraged, and vengeful, Indian slaves sometimes kneaded tainted blood into their masters’ bread, to little effect. Perhaps it was poetic justice that the Indians unintentionally did take a kind of revenge by infecting the early explorers with syphilis, injecting that lethal sexually transmitted disease for the ﬁ rst time into Europe.

The Spanish Conquistadores
 Gradually, Europeans realized that the American continents held rich prizes, especially the gold and silver of the advanced Indian civilizations in Mexico and Peru.

Spanish Explorers and Conquistadores


 The Scourge of Smallpox This Peruvian infant, depicted about 1700, was ravaged by the dread European disease and placed in a crude quarantine.

 Spain secured its claim to Columbus’s discovery in the Treaty of Tordesillas (1494), dividing with Portugal the “heathen lands” of the New World (see Map 1.4). The lion’s share went to Spain, but Portugal received compensating territory in Africa and Asia, as well as title to lands that one day would be Brazil. Spain became the dominant exploring and colonizing power in the 1500s. In the ser vice of God, as well as in search of gold and glory, Spanish conquistadores (conquerors) fanned out across the Caribbean and eventually onto the mainland of the American continents (see “Makers of America: The Spanish Conquistadores,” pp. 20–21). On Spain’s long roster of notable deeds, two spectacular exploits must be headlined. Vasco Nuñez Balboa, hailed as the discoverer of the Pa-



 ciﬁc Ocean, waded into the foaming waves off Panama in 1513 and boldly claimed for his king all the lands washed by that sea (see Map 1.5). Ferdinand Magellan started from Spain in 1519 with ﬁve tiny ships. After beating through the storm-lashed strait off the tip of South America that still bears his name, he was slain by the inhabitants of the Philippines. His one remaining vessel creaked home in 1522, completing the ﬁ rst circumnavigation of the globe. Other ambitious Spaniards ventured into North America. In 1513 and 1521, Juan Ponce de León explored Florida, which he at ﬁ rst thought was an island. Seeking gold—and probably not the mythical “fountain of youth”—he instead met with death by an Indian arrow. In 1540–1542 Francisco Coronado, in quest of fabled golden cities that turned out to be adobe pueblos, wandered with a clanking cavalcade through Arizona and New Mexico, penetrating as far east as Kansas. En route his expedition discovered two awesome natural wonders: the Grand Canyon of the Colorado River and enormous herds of buffalo (bison). Hernando de Soto, with six hundred armor-plated men, undertook a fantastic gold-seeking expedition during 1539–1542. Floundering through marshes and pine barrens from Florida westward, he discovered and crossed the majestic Mississippi River just north of its junction with the Arkansas River. After brutally mistreating the Indians with iron collars and ﬁerce dogs, he at length died of fever and wounds. His troops secretly disposed of his remains at night in the Mississippi, lest the Indians exhume and abuse their abuser’s corpse. Meanwhile in South America, the ironﬁsted conqueror Francisco Pizarro crushed the Incas of Peru in 1532 and added a huge hoard of booty to Spanish coffers. By 1600 Spain was swimming in New World silver, mostly from the fabulously rich mines at Potosí in present-day Bolivia, as well as from Mexico. This ﬂood of precious metal touched off a price revolution in Europe that increased consumer costs by as much as 500 percent in the hundred years after the midsixteenth century. Some scholars see in this ballooning European money supply the fuel that fed the growth of the economic system known as capitalism. Certainly, New World bullion helped transform the world economy. It swelled the vaults of bankers from Spain to Italy, laying the foundations of the modern commercial banking system. It clinked in the purses of merchants in France and Holland, stimulating the spread of commerce and manu facturing. And it paid for much of the burgeoning international trade with Asia, whose sellers had little use for any European good except silver.

Arctic Circle


Missis


 sippi R.

NORTH AMERICA

Coronado
1540–1542


C a b o t 1 4 97


 EUROPE

 PORTUGAL

CENTRAL AMERICA

West
Indies


 ibbe



30°N
Tropic of Cancer


AT L A N T I C

 ARABIA

O C E A N


 an Sea

Balboa


Med
 it Sea erranean



Verrazano
 Ponce de León bus Colum

Car


 ASIA

 SPAIN

De Soto
1539–1542


 Cortés

 Tenochtitlán (Mexico City)

60°N


 ENGLAND

Newfoundland


 FRANCE

Gulf of
Mexico


Cabeza
 de Vaca 1528–1536

Cartier
1535–1536


 c Vespuc

 i





 AFRICA

Arabian
Sea
0°


AT L A N T I C
ed 
 itio

OC EA N
n1 
9–






 Portuguese claims Ocean currents



150°W




2000 Km.


2000 Mi.


120°W


90°W


60°W


 ion 14 marcat Line of De ation emarc Line of D

 Spanish claims





Tropic of
Capricorn


 an’s 30°S Va agell n of M n 1522 ) r tu e R itio no Exped an del Ca sti (Seba

N


30°W


0°


 Map 1.4 Principal Voyages of Discovery Spain, Portugal, France, and England reaped the greatest advantages from the New World, but much of the earliest exploration was done by Italians, notably Christopher Columbus of Genoa. John Cabot, another native of Genoa (his original name was Giovanni Caboto), sailed for England’s King Henry VII. Giovanni da Verrazano was a Florentine employed by France.

 The islands of the Caribbean Sea—the West Indies as they came to be called, in yet another perpetuation of Columbus’s geographic confusion—served as offshore bases for the staging of the Spanish invasion of the mainland Americas. Here supplies could be stored, and men and horses could be rested and acclimated, before proceeding to the conquest of the continents. The loosely orga nized and vulnerable native communities of the West Indies also provided laboratories for testing the techniques that would eventually subdue the advanced Indian civilizations of Mexico and Peru. The most important such technique was the institution known as the encomienda. It allowed the government

 OCEAN

 ma

Exp


Ga


 n’s

 da

 lla

 INDIAN

 o

 ge

SOUTH AMERICA

Pizarro
1531–1533


 sc

Ma


O C EAN


1 4 97


PAC I F IC

–149 8


Equator


30°E


60°E


Interactive Map


 to “commend,” or give, Indians to certain colonists in return for the promise to try to Christianize them. In all but name, it was slavery. Spanish missionary Bartolomé de Las Casas, appalled by the encomienda system in Hispaniola, called it “a moral pestilence invented by Satan.”

The Conquest of Mexico
 In 1519 Hernán Cortés set sail from Cuba with sixteen fresh horses and several hundred men aboard eleven ships, bound for Mexico and for destiny. On the island of



M
 is

.
 oR

NORTH AMERICA

Santa Fé


San
Diego


 ad

 e nd Gra

 r on o,

Pon


–1


110°W




PACIFIC OCEAN

 ce

 de

Gulf of
Mexico




Map 1.5 Principal Early
Spanish Explorations and
 Conquests Note that Coronado traversed northern Texas and Oklahoma. In present-day eastern Kansas, he found, instead of the great golden city he sought, a drab encampment, probably of Wichita Indians.

N


30°


St. Augustine, 1565


Rio


Co


120°W


ATLANTIC OCEAN
De S oto 9–15 
 l Co

 a or

 sippi R. sis

 d

 Cortés Conquers Mexico

NEW SPAIN

Le


 ón

,1






N


20°


CUBA
Co rté 
Veracruz


Mexico City


 s, 1519

Caribbean Sea
80°W


N


250 500 Km.


Balboa,


500 Mi.


Pizarro,
1531–1533
100°W


90°W


70°W
10°N


SOUTH AMERICA

To Peru


Interactive Map


 Bartolomé de Las Casas (1474–1566), a reformminded Dominican friar, wrote The Destruction of the Indies in 1542 to chronicle the awful fate of the Native Americans and to protest Spanish policies in the New World. He was especially horriﬁed at the catastrophic effects of disease on the native peoples:

“


 Who of those in future centuries will believe this? I myself who am writing this and saw it and know the most about it can hardly believe that such was possible.

”


 Cozumel off the Yucatán Peninsula, he rescued a Spanish castaway who had been enslaved for several years by the Mayan-speaking Indians. A short distance farther on, he picked up the female Indian slave Malinche, who knew both Mayan and Nahuatl, the language of the powerful Aztec rulers of the great empire in the highlands of central Mexico. In addition to his superior ﬁrepower, Cortés now had the advantage, through these two interpreters, of understanding the speech of the native peoples whom he was about to encounter, including the Aztecs. Malinche eventually learned Spanish and was baptized with the Spanish name of Doña Marina. Near present-day Veracruz, Cortés made his ﬁ nal land fall. Through his interpreters he learned of unrest

 within the Aztec empire among the peoples from whom the Aztecs demanded tribute. He also heard alluring tales of the gold and other wealth stored up in the legendary Aztec capital of Tenochtitlán. He lusted to tear open the coffers of the Aztec kingdom. To quell his mutinous troops, he boldly burned his ships, cutting off any hope of retreat. Gathering a force of some twenty thousand Indian allies, he marched on Tenochtitlán and toward one of history’s most dramatic and fateful encounters. As Cortés proceeded, the Aztec chieftain Moctezuma sent ambassadors bearing fabulous gifts to welcome the approaching Spaniards. These only whetted the conquistador’s appetite. “We Spanish suffer from a strange disease of the heart,” Cortés allegedly informed the emissaries, “for which the only known remedy is gold.” The ambassadors reported this comment to Moctezuma, along with the astonishing fact that the newcomers rode on the backs of “deer” (horses). The superstitious Moctezuma also believed that Cortés was the god Quetzalcoatl, whose return from the eastern sea was predicted in Aztec legends. Expectant yet apprehensive, Moctezuma allowed the conquistadores to approach his capital unopposed. As the Spaniards entered the Valley of Mexico, the sight of the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlán amazed them. With 300,000 inhabitants spread over ten square miles, it rivaled in size and pomp any city in contemporary

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
The Spanish The Great AfricanConquistadores American Migration 
I


 n 1492, the same year that Columbus sighted America, the great Moorish city of Granada, in Spain, fell after a ten-year siege. For ﬁve centuries the Christian kingdoms of Spain had been trying to drive the North African Muslim Moors (“the Dark Ones,” in Spanish) off the Iberian Peninsula, and with the fall of Granada they succeeded. But the lengthy Reconquista had left its mark on Spanish society. Centuries of military and religious confrontation nurtured an obsession with status and honor, bred religious zealotry and intolerance, and created a large class of men who regarded manual labor and commerce contemptuously. With the Reconquista ended, some of these men turned their restless gaze to Spain’s New World frontier. At ﬁ rst Spanish hopes for America focused on the Caribbean and on ﬁ nding a sea route to Asia. Gradually, however, word ﬁ ltered back of rich kingdoms on the mainland. Between 1519 and 1540, Spanish conquistadores swept across the Americas in two wide arcs of conquest—one driv ing from Cuba through Mexico

Conquistadores, ca. 1534
 This illustration for a book called the Köhler Codex of Nuremberg may be the earliest depiction of the conquistadores in the Americas. It portrays men and horses alike as steadfast and self-assured in their work of conquest.



 into what is now the southwestern United States, the other starting from Panama and pushing south into Peru. Within half a century of Columbus’s arrival in the Americas, the conquistadores had extinguished the great Aztec and Incan empires and claimed for church and crown a territory that extended from Colorado to Argentina, including much of what is now the continental United States. The military conquest of this vast region was achieved by just ten thousand men, orga nized in a series of private expeditions. Hernán Cortés, Francisco Pizarro, and other aspiring conquerors signed contracts with the Spanish monarch, raised money from investors, and then went about recruiting an army. Only a small minority of the conquistadores—leaders or followers—were nobles. About half were professional soldiers and sailors; the rest comprised peasants, artisans, and members of the middling classes. Most were in their twenties and early thirties, and all knew how to wield a sword.

 Diverse motives spurred these motley adventurers. Some hoped to win royal titles and favors by bringing new peoples under the Spanish ﬂag. Others sought to ensure God’s favor by spreading Christianity to the pagans. Some men hoped to escape dubious pasts, and others sought the kind of historical adventure experienced by heroes of classical antiquity. Nearly all shared a lust for gold. As one of Cortés’s foot soldiers put it, “We came here to serve God and the king, and also to get rich.” One historian adds that the conquistadores ﬁ rst fell on their knees and then fell upon the aborigines. Armed with horses and gunpowder and preceded by disease, the conquistadores quickly overpowered the Indians. But most never achieved their dreams of glory. Few received titles of nobility, and many of the rank and ﬁ le remained permanently indebted to the absentee investors who paid for their equipment. Even when an expedition captured exceptionally rich booty, the spoils were unevenly divided: men from the command-

 er’s home region often received more, and men on horseback generally got two shares to the infantryman’s one. The conquistadores lost still more power as the crown gradually tightened its control in the New World. By the 1530s in Mexico and the 1550s in Peru, colorless colonial administrators had replaced the freebooting conquistadores. Nevertheless, the conquistadores achieved a kind of immortality. Because of a scarcity of Spanish women in the early days of the conquest, many of the conquistadores married Indian women. The soldiers who conquered Paraguay received three native women each, and Cortés’s soldiers in Mexico—who were forbidden to consort with pagan women—quickly had their lovers baptized into the Catholic faith. Their offspring, the “new race” of mestizos, formed a cultural and a biological bridge between Latin America’s European and Indian races.

 An Aztec View of the Conquest, 1531 Produced just a dozen years after Cortés’s arrival in 1519, this drawing by an Aztec artist pictures the Indians rendering tribute to their conquerors. The inclusion of the banner showing the Madonna and child also illustrates the early incorporation of Christian beliefs by the Indians.



 Chapter 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000 b.c.e.–1769 c.e.

 Europe. The Aztec metropolis rose from an island in the center of a lake, surrounded by ﬂoating gardens of extraordinary beauty. It was connected to the mainland by a series of causeways and supplied with fresh water by an artfully designed aqueduct. Moctezuma treated Cortés hospitably at ﬁ rst, but soon the Spaniards’ hunger for gold and power exhausted their welcome. “They thirsted mightily for gold; they stuffed themselves with it; they starved for it; they lusted for it like pigs,” said one Aztec. On the noche triste (sad night) of June 30, 1520, the Aztecs attacked, driv ing the Spanish down the causeways from Tenochtitlán in a frantic, bloody retreat. Cortés then laid siege to the city, and it capitulated on August 13, 1521. That same year a smallpox epidemic burned through the Valley of Mexico. The combination of conquest and disease took a grisly toll. The Aztec empire gave way to three centuries of Spanish rule. The temples of Tenochtitlán were destroyed to make way for the Christian cathedrals of Mexico City, built on the site of the ruined Indian capital. And the native population of Mexico, winnowed mercilessly by the invader’s dis-

 eases, shrank from some 20 million to 2 million people in less than a century. Yet the invader brought more than conquest and death. He brought his crops and his animals, his language and his laws, his customs and his religion, all of which proved adaptable to the peoples of Mexico. He intermarried with the surviving Indians, creating a distinctive culture of mestizos, people of mixed Indian and European heritage. To this day Mexican civilization remains a unique blend of the Old World and the New, producing both ambivalence and pride among people of Mexican heritage. Cortés’s translator, Malinche, for example, has given her name to the Mexican language in the word malinchista, or “traitor.” But Mexicans also celebrate Columbus Day as the Dia de la Raza—the birthday of a wholly new race of people.

The Spread of Spanish America
 Spain’s colonial empire grew swiftly and impressively. Within about half a century of Columbus’s landfall,

 Artists’ Rendering of Tenochtitlán Amid tribal strife in the fourteenth century, the Aztecs built a capital on a small island in a lake in the central Valley of Mexico. From here they oversaw the most powerful empire yet to arise in Mesoamerica. Two main temples stood at the city’s sacred center, one dedicated to Tlaloc, the ancient rain god, and the other to Huitzilopochtli, the tribal god, who was believed to require human hearts for sustenance.

 Spain's New World Empire

 Cortés and Malinche, ca. 1540 (detail) Though done by an Indian artist, this drawing identiﬁes Malinche by her Christian name, Marina. She eventually married one of Cortés’s soldiers, with whom she traveled to Spain and was received at the Spanish court.

 hundreds of Spanish cities and towns ﬂourished in the Americas, especially in the great silver-producing centers of Peru and Mexico. Some 160,000 Spaniards, mostly men, had subjugated millions of Indians. Majestic cathedrals dotted the land, printing presses turned out books, and scholars studied at distinguished universities, including those at Mexico City and Lima, Peru, both founded in 1551, eighty-ﬁve years before Harvard, the ﬁ rst college established in the Eng lish colonies. But how secure were these imperial possessions? Other powers were already snifﬁ ng around the edges of the Spanish domain, eager to bite off their share of the promised wealth of the new lands. The upstart Eng lish sent Giovanni Caboto (known in Eng lish as John Cabot) to explore the northeastern coast of North America in 1497 and 1498. The French king dispatched another Italian mariner, Giovanni da Verrazano, to probe the eastern seaboard in 1524. Ten years later the Frenchman Jacques Cartier journeyed hundreds of miles up the St. Lawrence River. To secure the northern periphery of their New World domain against such encroachments and to convert more Indian souls to Christianity, the Spanish began to fortify and settle their North American borderlands. In a move to block French ambitions and to protect the sea-lanes to the Caribbean, the Spanish



 erected a fortress at St. Augustine, Florida, in 1565, thus founding the oldest continually inhabited European settlement in the future United States. In Mexico the tales of Coronado’s expedition of the 1540s to the upper Rio Grande and Colorado River regions continued to beckon the conquistadores northward. A dust-begrimed expeditionary column, with eighty-three rumbling wagons and hundreds of grumbling men, traversed the bare Sonora Desert from Mexico into the Rio Grande valley in 1598. Led by Don Juan de Oñate, the Spaniards cruelly abused the Pueblo peoples they encountered. In the Battle of Acoma in 1599, the Spanish severed one foot of each survivor. They proclaimed the area to be the province of New Mexico in 1609 and founded its capital at Santa Fé the following year (see Map 1.6). The Spanish settlers in New Mexico found a few furs and precious little gold, but they did discover a wealth of souls to be harvested for the Christian religion. The Roman Catholic mission became the central institution in colonial New Mexico until the missionaries’ efforts to suppress native religious customs provoked an Indian uprising called Popé’s Rebellion in 1680. The Pueblo rebels destroyed every Catholic church in the province and killed a score of priests and hundreds of Spanish settlers. In a reversal of Cortés’s treatment of the Aztec temples more than a century earlier, the Indians rebuilt a kiva, or ceremonial religious chamber, on the ruins of the Spanish plaza at Santa Fé. It took nearly half a century for the Spanish fully to reclaim New Mexico from the insurrectionary Indians. Meanwhile, as a further hedge against the everthreatening French, who had sent an expedition under Robert de La Salle down the Mississippi River in the 1680s, the Spanish began around 1716 to establish settlements in Texas. Some refugees from the Pueblo uprising trickled into Texas, and a few missions were established there, including the one at San Antonio later known as the Alamo. But for at least another century, the Spanish presence remained weak in this distant northeastern outpost of Spain’s Mexican empire. To the west, in Cal i fornia, no serious foreign threat loomed, and Spain directed its attention there only belatedly. Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo had explored the Cal ifornia coast in 1542, but he failed to ﬁ nd San Francisco Bay or anything else of much interest. For some two centuries thereafter, Cal i fornia slumbered undisturbed by European intruders. Then in 1769 Spanish missionaries led by Father Junipero Serra founded at San Diego the ﬁ rst of a chain of twenty-one missions that wound



 Chapter 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000 b.c.e.–1769 c.e.

120°W


 do

R.


Co


 l

 California missions, 1769–1823

 a or

100°W


105°W


Y
CK RO TS. M

35°N


110°W


115°W


Arkansas R
.


Quivira


Taos
Santa Fé


Ca


Acoma


Red R.


Gila R.


SONORA DESERT

Cab


PACIFIC OCEAN

 nad ian R.

 rillo

Br


 az

 os R.

, 154


Tucson


R.


 AD

Mission
San Antonio


 a

 NT

 ni

E
DR MA L TA RA ER RIEN O

, 1598


 or

 DE

 lif

 CI

Ca


 OC

 SI

 RE

 of

 AL



 e

 ñate de O

M


 lf



100 200 Km.


 os

 and

 RA

Gu


25°N


Pec


 o

Gr


 ER

N


Ri


El Paso


 SI

30°N


Durango


200 Mi.


M E X IC O


 Present-day New Mexico

 Map 1.6 Spain’s North American Frontier, 1542–1823 Interactive Map

 up the coast as far as Sonoma, north of San Francisco Bay. Father Serra’s brown-robed Franciscan friars toiled with zealous devotion to Christianize the three hundred thousand native Cal i fornians. They gathered the seminomadic Indians into fortiﬁed missions and taught them horticulture and basic crafts. These “mission Indians” did adopt Christianity, but they also lost contact with their native cultures and often lost their lives as well, as the white man’s diseases doomed these biologically vulnerable peoples. The misdeeds of the Spanish in the New World obscured their substantial achievements and helped give birth to the Black Legend. This false concept held that the conquerors merely tortured and butchered the Indians (“kill ing for Christ”), stole their gold, infected them with smallpox, and left little but misery behind. The Spanish invaders did indeed kill, enslave, and infect countless natives, but they also erected a colossal

 empire, sprawling from Cal i fornia and Florida to Tierra del Fuego. They grafted their culture, laws, religion, and language onto a wide array of native societies, laying the foundations for a score of Spanish-speaking nations. Clearly, the Spaniards, who had more than a century’s head start over the Eng lish, were genuine empire builders and cultural innovators in the New World. As compared with their Anglo-Saxon rivals, their colonial establishment was larger and richer, and it was destined to endure more than a quarter of a century longer. And in the last analysis, the Spanish paid the Native Americans the high compliment of fusing with them through marriage and incorporating indigenous culture into their own, rather than shunning and eventually isolating the Indians as their Eng lish adversaries would do.

Chronology


 CHRONOLOGY ca. 33,000– 8000 B.C.E.

 First humans cross into Americas from Asia

1519–


 Cortés conquers Mexico for Spain

 ca. 5000 B.C.E.

 Corn is developed as a staple crop in highland Mexico



 Magellan’s vessel completes circumnavigation of the world

 ca. 4000 B.C.E.

 First civilized societies develop in the Middle East



 Verrazano explores eastern seaboard of North America for France

 ca. 1200 B.C.E.

 Corn planting reaches present-day American Southwest



 Pizarro crushes Incas

 ca. 1000 C.E.



 Cartier journeys up the St. Lawrence River

 Norse voyagers discover and brieﬂy settle in northeastern North America Corn cultivation reaches Midwest and southeastern Atlantic seaboard

1539–


 De Soto explores the Southeast and discovers the Mississippi River

1540–


 Coronado explores present-day Southwest

 ca. 1100 C.E.

 Height of Mississippian settlement at Cahokia

 ca. 1100– 1300 C.E.



 Cabrillo explores Cal i fornia coast for Spain

 Christian crusades arouse European interest in the East



 Spanish build fortress at St. Augustine



 Marco Polo returns to Europe

 late 1500s

 late 1400s

 Iroquois Confederacy founded, according to Iroquois legend

 Spain becomes united



 Dias rounds southern tip of Africa

 ca. 1598–

 Spanish under Oñate conquer Pueblo peoples of Rio Grande valley



 Columbus lands in the Bahamas



 Spanish found New Mexico



 Treaty of Tordesillas between Spain and Portugal



 Popé’s Rebellion in New Mexico



 1680s Da Gama reaches India Cabot explores northeastern coast of North America for Eng land

 French expedition down Mississippi River under La Salle



 Serra founds ﬁ rst Cal i fornia mission, at San Diego



 Balboa claims all lands touched by the Paciﬁc Ocean for Spain

1513,


 Ponce de León explores Florida





 Chapter 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000 b.c.e.–1769 c.e.

KEY TERMS
Canadian Shield (4) Incas (8) Aztecs (8) nation-states (8) Cahokia (10) three-sister farming (10) middlemen (11) caravel (11) plantation (13) Columbian Exchange (15) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Tordesillas, Treaty of (17) conquistadores (17) capitalism (17) encomienda (18) noche triste (22) mestizos (22) Acoma, Battle of (23) Popé’s Rebellion (23) Black Legend (24) 
Ferdinand of Aragon
Isabella of Castile
Christopher Columbus
Francisco Coronado
Francisco Pizarro
Bartolomé de Las Casas
 Hernán Cortés

 Malinche (Doña Marina) Moctezuma Giovanni Caboto (John Cabot) Robert de La Salle Father Junipero Serra

To Learn More
Mark A. Burkholder and Lyman L. Johnson, Colonial Latin
America (2000)
Alfred W. Crosby, Jr., The Columbian Exchange: Biological
 and Cultural Consequences of 1492 (1972) Jared Diamond, Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies (1998) Tom Dillehay, The Settlement of the Americas: A New Prehistory (2000) J. H. Elliott, Empires of the Atlantic World (2006) Olaudah Equiano, Equiano’s Travels (1789) Steven W. Hackel, Children of Coyote, Missionaries of Saint Francis: Indian-Spanish Relations in Colonial California, 1769–1850 (2005) Hugh Honour, The New Golden Land (1975) Alice Beck Keyhoe, America Before the European Invasions (2002)

 Lyle N. McAlister, Spain and Portugal in the New World, 1492–1700 (1984) Anthony Pagden, Peoples and Empires: A Short History of European Migration, Exploration, and Conquest, from Greece to the Present (2003) John Thornton, Africa and Africans in the Making of the Atlantic World, 1400–1800 (1992) David J. Weber, Bárbaros: Spaniards and Their Savages in the Age of Enlightenment (2005)

 A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Planting
 of English America




1500–1733
 . . . For I shall yet live to see it [Virginia] an Inglishe nation.

A


 s the seventeenth century dawned, scarcely a hundred years after Columbus’s momentous landfall, the face of much of the New World had already been profoundly transformed. European crops and livestock had begun to alter the very landscape, touching off an ecological revolution that would reverberate for centuries to come. From Tierra del Fuego in the south to Hudson Bay in the north, disease and armed conquest had cruelly winnowed and disrupted the native peoples. Several hundred thousand enslaved Africans toiled on Caribbean and Brazilian sugar plantations. From Florida and New Mexico southward, most of the New World lay ﬁ rmly within the grip of imperial Spain. But north of Mexico, America in 1600 remained largely unexplored and effectively unclaimed by Europeans. Then, as if to herald the coming century of colonization and conﬂ ict in the northern continent, three European powers planted three primitive outposts in

 three distant corners of the continent within three years of one another: the Spanish at Santa Fé in 1610, the French at Québec in 1608, and, most consequentially for the future United States, the Eng lish at Jamestown, Virginia, in 1607.

 England’s Imperial Stirrings Feeble indeed were Eng land’s efforts in the 1500s to compete with the sprawling Spanish Empire. As Spain’s ally in the ﬁ rst half of the century, Eng land took little interest in establishing its own overseas colonies. Religious conﬂ ict also disrupted Eng land in midcentury, after King Henry VIII broke with the Roman Catholic Church in the 1530s, launching the Eng lish Protestant Reformation. Catholics battled Protestants for decades, and the religious balance of power seesawed. But after

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e





