 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

Battle of Bunker Hill,
June 17, 1775 This British
 engraving conveys the vulnerability of the British regulars to attacks by the American militiamen. Although a defeat for the colonists, the battle quickly proved a moral victory for the Patriots. Outnumbered and outgunned, they held their own against the British and suffered many fewer casualties.

 hiring thousands of German troops to help crush his rebellious subjects. Six German princes involved in the transaction needed the money (one reputedly had seventy-four children); George III needed the men. Because most of these soldiers-for-hire came from the German principality of Hesse, the Americans called all the European mercenaries Hessians. News of the Hessian deal shocked the colonists. The quarrel, they felt, was within the family. Why bring in outside mercenaries, especially foreigners who had an exaggerated reputation for butchery? Hessian hirelings proved to be good soldiers in a mechanical sense, but many of them were more interested in booty than in duty. For good reason they were dubbed “Hessian ﬂ ies.” Seduced by American promises of land, hundreds of them ﬁ nally deserted and remained in America to become respected citizens.

The Abortive Conquest
 of Canada The unsheathed sword continued to take its toll. In October 1775, on the eve of a cruel winter, the British burned Falmouth (Portland), Maine. In that same autumn, the rebels daringly undertook a two-pronged invasion of Canada. American leaders believed, erroneously, that the conquered French were explosively

 restive under the British yoke. A successful assault on Canada would add a fourteenth colony, while depriving Britain of a valuable base for striking at the colonies in revolt. But this large-scale attack, involving some two thousand American troops, contradicted the claim of the colonists that they were merely ﬁghting defensively for a redress of grievances. Invasion northward was undisguised offensive warfare. This bold stroke for Canada narrowly missed success (see Map 8.1). One invading column under the Irish-born General Richard Montgomery, formerly of the British army, pushed up the Lake Champlain route and captured Montréal. He was joined at Québec by the bedraggled army of General Benedict Arnold, whose men had been reduced to eating dogs and shoe leather during their grueling march through the Maine woods. An assault on Québec, launched on the last day of 1775, was beaten off. The able Montgomery was killed; the dashing Arnold was wounded in one leg. Scattered remnants under his command retreated up the St. Lawrence River, reversing the way Montgomery had come. French Canadian leaders, who had been generously treated by the British in the Quebec Act of 1774, showed no real desire to welcome the plundering anti-Catholic invaders. Bitter ﬁghting persisted in the colonies, though most Americans continued to disclaim a desire for independence. In January 1776 the British set ﬁ re to the



Toward Independence


200 Km.
200 Mi.


 British victory

St


.L


.L


 e

 r ge



Fort Oswego


Bu
Mo


L.
Champlain  Arnold’s naval battle Oct. 11, 1776



N.H.


Manchester


Albany


MASS.
Lexington April 19, 1775 
Hudson R.


 PENNSYLVANIA

Falmouth


Saratoga
 Burgoyne surrenders Oct. 17, 1777.

Concord
April 19, 1775


NEW YORK

 CONN.

Fort Washington Nov. 16, 1776
Washington Dec. 1776
Cornwallis Dec. 1776
Princeton Jan. 3, 1777
Trenton Dec. 26, 1776
Germantown Oct. 4, 1777


Newburyport
Bunker Hill
June 17, 1775


Boston
 siege 1775–1776

R.I.


 Washington’s retreat 1776 Long Island Aug. 27, 1776

40°N


Valley Forge
Brandywine Sept. 11, 1777


Monmouth Court House
June 28, 1778


Philadelphia
Wilmington


 MD.

 ph

 ia

)


N.J.
 l ad

 el

 VIRGINIA

AT L A N T I C O C E A N N

 we





 (to

Phi


 DEL.

70°W


Ho


Map 8.1 Revolution in
 the North, 1775–1776 Benedict Arnold’s troops were described as “pretty young men” when they sailed from Massachusetts. They were considerably less pretty on their arrival in Québec, after eight weeks of struggling through wet and frigid forests, often without food. “No one can imagine,” one of them wrote, “the sweetness of a roasted shot-pouch [ammunition bag] to the famished appetite.”

MAINE (MASS.)

.
 eR

Oriskany
Aug. 6, 1777


Fort Stanwix
Aug. 23, 1777




 Montréal

Crown Point
Fort Ticonderoga
L.
George 

Lake Ontario




R.


 aw

 y1

 nn

St


 American victory

 nc

 er

Co


Fort


 re

 g

 om



 British forces

 nt

 e



BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

 yn

 ld

 American forces

 go

 no

 r



 Québec Dec. 1776



Ar






 icut



 ect



Chesapeake
Bay


Interactive Map


 Virginia town of Norfolk. In March they were ﬁ nally forced to evacuate Boston, taking with them the leading friends of the king. (Evacuation Day is still celebrated annually in Boston.) In the South the rebellious colonists won two victories in 1776—one in February against some ﬁ fteen hundred Loyalists at Moore’s Creek Bridge in North Carolina, and the other in June against an invading British ﬂeet at Charleston harbor.

Thomas Paine Preaches
Common Sense
 Why did Americans continue to deny any intention of independence? Loyalty to the empire was deeply ingrained; many Americans continued to consider themselves part of a transatlantic community in which the



 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

 mother country of Britain played a leading role; colonial unity was poor; and open rebellion was dangerous, especially against a formidable Britain. Irish rebels of that day were customarily hanged, drawn, and quartered. American rebels might have fared no better. As late as January 1776—ﬁve months before independence was declared—the king’s health was being toasted by the ofﬁcers of Washington’s mess near Boston. “God save the king” had not yet been replaced by “God save the Congress.” Gradually the Americans were shocked into recognizing the necessity of separating from the crown. Their eyes were jolted open by harsh British acts like the burning of Falmouth and Norfolk, and especially by the hiring of the Hessians. Then in 1776 came the publication of Common Sense, one of the most inﬂuential pamphlets ever written. Its author was the radical Thomas Paine, once an impoverished corset-maker’s apprentice, who had come over from Britain a year earlier. He began his incendiary tract with a treatise on the nature of government and eloquently anticipated Thomas Jefferson’s declaration that the only lawful states were those that derive “their just powers from the consent of the governed.” As for the king, whom the Americans professed to revere, he was nothing but “the Royal Brute of Great Britain.” Common Sense became a whirlwind best seller. Within a few months the astonishing total of 120,000 copies were sold.

In Common Sense Thomas Paine (1737–1809)
 argued for the superiority of a republic over a monarchy:

“


 The nearer any government approaches to a republic the less business there is for a king. It is somewhat difﬁcult to ﬁnd a proper name for the government of England. Sir William Meredith calls it a republic; but in its present state it is unworthy of the name, because the corrupt inﬂuence of the crown, by having all the places in its disposal, hath so effectively swallowed up the power, and eaten out the virtue of the house of commons (the republican part of the constitution) that the government of England is nearly as monarchical as that of France or Spain.

”


 Thomas Paine, by Auguste Millière

 Paine ﬂatly branded the shilly-shallying of the colonists as contrary to “common sense.” Nowhere in the physical universe did the smaller heavenly body control the larger one. So why should the tiny island of Britain control the vast continent of America? Paine’s pen went a long way toward convincing the American colonists that their true cause was independence rather than reconciliation with Britain—not least because without independence, they could not hope for foreign assistance. Paine could thus be said to have drafted the foundational document not only of American independence, but of American foreign policy as well.

Paine and the Idea
 of “Republicanism” Paine’s passionate protest was as compelling as it was eloquent and radical—even doubly radical. It called not simply for independence, but for the creation of a new kind of political society, a republic, where power ﬂowed from the people themselves, not from a corrupt and

 Jefferson's Declaration

 despotic monarch. In language laced with biblical imagery familiar to common folk, he argued that all government ofﬁcials—governors, senators, and judges— not just representatives in a house of commons, should derive their authority from popular consent. Paine was hardly the ﬁrst person to champion a republican form of government. Political philosophers had advanced the idea since the days of classical Greece and Rome. Revived in the Renaissance and in seventeenth-century Eng land, republican ideals had uneasily survived within the British “mixed government,” with its delicate balance of king, nobility, and commons. Republicanism particularly appealed to British politicians critical of excessive power in the hands of the king and his advisers. Their writings found a responsive audience among the American colonists, who interpreted the vengeful royal acts of the previous decade as part of a monarchical conspiracy to strip them of their liberties as British subjects. Paine’s radical prescription for the colonies—to reject monarchy and empire and embrace an independent republic—fell on receptive ears. The colonists’ experience with governance had prepared them well for Paine’s summons to create a republic. Many settlers, particularly New Eng landers, had practiced a kind of republicanism in their democratic town meetings and annual elections, while the popularly elected committees of correspondence during 1774 and 1775 had demonstrated the feasibility of republican government. The absence of a hereditary aristocracy and the relative equality of condition enjoyed by landowning farmers meshed well with the republican repudiation of a ﬁ xed hierarchy of power. Most Americans considered citizen “virtue” fundamental to any successful republican government. Because political power no longer rested with the central, all-powerful authority of the king, individuals in a republic needed to sacriﬁce their personal self-interest to the public good. The collective good of “the people”

 The French philosophe Abbé Raynal (1713–1796) wrote in 1770,

“


 If any fortunate revolution should take place in the world, it will begin in America. . . . It will become the asylum of our people who have been oppressed by political establishments, or driven away by war.

”




 mattered more than the private rights and interests of individuals. Paine inspired his contemporaries to view America as fertile ground for the cultivation of such civic virtue. Yet not all Patriots agreed with Paine’s ultrademocratic approach to republicanism. Some favored a republic ruled by a “natural aristocracy” of talent. Republicanism for them meant an end to hereditary aristocracy, but not an end to all social hierarchy. These more conser vative republicans feared that the fervor for liberty would overwhelm the stability of the social order. They watched with trepidation as the “lower orders” of society—poorer farmers, tenants, and laboring classes in towns and cities—seemed to embrace a kind of runaway republicanism that amounted to radical “leveling.” The contest to deﬁ ne the nature of American republicanism would noisily continue for at least the next hundred years.

 Jefferson’s “Explanation” of Independence Members of the Philadelphia Congress, instructed by their respective colonies, gradually edged toward a clean break. On June 7, 1776, ﬁery Richard Henry Lee of Virginia moved that “these United Colonies are, and of right ought to be, free and independent states.” After considerable debate, the motion was adopted nearly a month later, on July 2, 1776. The passing of Lee’s resolution was the formal “declaration” of independence by the American colonies, and technically this was all that was needed to cut the British tie. John Adams wrote conﬁdently that ever thereafter, July 2 would be celebrated annually with ﬁ reworks. But something more was required. An epochal rupture of this kind called for some formal explanation. An inspirational appeal was also needed to enlist other British colonies in the Americas, to invite assistance from foreign nations, and to rally resistance at home. Shortly after Lee made his memorable motion on June 7, Congress appointed a committee to prepare a more formal statement of separation. The task of drafting it fell to Thomas Jefferson, a tall, freckled, sandyhaired Virginia lawyer of thirty-three. Despite his youth, he was already recognized as a brilliant writer, and he measured up splendidly to the awesome assignment. After some debate and amendment, the Declaration of Independence was formally approved by the Congress on July 4, 1776. It might better have been



 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

 The American signers of the Declaration of Independence had reason to fear for their necks. In 1802, twenty-six years later, George III (1738–1820) approved this death sentence for seven Irish rebels:

“


 . . . [You] are to be hanged by the neck, but not until you are dead; for while you are still living your bodies are to be taken down, your bowels torn out and burned before your faces, your heads then cut off, and your bodies divided each into four quarters, and your heads and quarters to be then at the King’s disposal; and may the Almighty God have mercy on your souls.

”


George III (1738–1820), Studio of Alan Ramsay,
 ca. 1767 America’s last king, he was a good man, unlike some of his scandal-tainted brothers and sons, but a bad king. Doggedly determined to regain arbitrary power for the crown, he antagonized and then lost the thirteen American colonies. During much of his sixty-year reign, he seemed to be insane, but recently medical science has found that he was suffering from a rare metabolic and hereditary disease called porphyria.

 called “the Explanation of Independence” or, as one contemporary described it, “Mr. Jefferson’s advertisement of Mr. Lee’s resolution.” Jefferson’s pronouncement, couched in a lofty style, was magniﬁcent. He gave his appeal universality by invoking the “natural rights” of humankind—not just British rights. He argued persuasively that because the king had ﬂouted these rights, the colonists were justiﬁed in cutting their connection. He then set forth a long list of the presumably tyrannous misdeeds of George III. The overdrawn bill of indictment included imposing taxes without consent, dispensing with trial by jury, abolishing valued laws, establishing a military dictatorship, maintaining standing armies in peacetime,

 cutting off trade, burning towns, hiring mercenaries, and inciting hostility among the Indians.* Jefferson’s withering blast was admittedly onesided. He acted, in effect, as a prosecuting attorney, and he took certain liberties with historical truth. He was not writing history; he was making it through what has been called “the world’s greatest editorial.” He owned many slaves, and his afﬁ rmation that “all men are created equal” was to haunt him and his fellow citizens for generations. The formal Declaration of Independence cleared the air as a thundershower does on a muggy day. As Paine had predicted, and as events were to prove, foreign assistance could now be solicited with greater hope of success. Those Patriots who deﬁed the king were now rebels, not loving subjects shooting their way into reconciliation. They must all hang together, Franklin is said to have grimly remarked, or they would all hang separately. Or, in the eloquent language of the great declaration, “We mutually pledge to each other our lives, our fortunes and our sacred honor.” Jefferson’s deﬁant Declaration of Independence had a universal impact unmatched by any other American document. This “shout heard round the world” has been a source of inspiration to countless revolutionary movements against arbitrary authority. Lafayette hung a copy on a wall in his home, leaving beside it room for a future French Declaration of the Rights of Man—a declaration that was ofﬁcially born thirteen years later. *For an annotated text of the Declaration of Independence, see the Appendix.

A
Revolution for Women? Abigail Adams Chides Her Husband, 1776
 n the midst of the revolutionary fervor of 1776, at least one woman—Abigail Adams, wife of noted Massachusetts Patriot (and future president) John Adams—raised her voice on behalf of women. Yet she apparently raised it only in private—in this personal letter to her husband. Private documents like the correspondence and diaries of individuals both prominent and ordinary offer invaluable sources for the historian seeking to discover sentiments, opinions, and perspectives that are often difﬁcult to discern in the ofﬁcial public record. What might it suggest about the historical circumstances of the 1770s that Abigail Adams conﬁ ned her claim for women’s equality to this conﬁdential exchange with her spouse? What might have inspired the arguments she employed? Despite her privileged position and persuasive power, and despite her threat to “foment a rebellion,” Abigail Adams’s plea went largely unheeded in the Revolutionary era—as did comparable pleadings to extend the revolutionary principle of equality to blacks. What might have accounted for this limited application of the ideas of liberty and equality in the midst of a supposedly democratic revolution?

I




MAKERS OF

AMERICA
The Loyalists The Great AfricanAmerican Migration 
I


 n late 1776 Catherine Van Cortlandt wrote to her husband, a New Jersey merchant ﬁghting in a Loyalist brigade, about the Patriot troops who had quartered themselves in her house. “They were the most disorderly of species,” she complained, “and their ofﬁcers were from the dregs of the people.” Like the Van Cortlandts, many Loyalists thought of themselves as the “better sort of people.” They viewed their adversaries as “lawless mobs” and “brutes.” Conservative, wealthy, and well educated, Loyalists of this breed thought a break with Britain would invite anarchy. Loyalism made sense to them, too, for practical

 Tough Times for Loyalists Under the shadow of the tar bucket and bag of feathers shown in the upper right background, these Virginia Loyalists were roughly handled by a club-wielding crowd of Patriots.



 reasons. Viewing colonial militias as no match for His Majesty’s army, Loyalist pamphleteer Daniel Leonard warned his Patriot enemies in 1775 that “nothing short of a miracle could gain you one battle.” But Loyalism was hardly conﬁ ned to the well-todo. It also appealed to many people of modest means who identiﬁed strongly with Britain or who had reason to fear a Patriot victory. Thousands of British veterans of the Seven Years’ War, for example, had settled in the colonies after 1763. Many of them took up farming on two-hundred-acre land grants in New York. They were loath to turn their backs on the crown. So, too, were recent immigrants from non-Eng lish regions of the British Isles, especially from Scotland and Ireland, who had settled in Georgia or the backcountry of North and South Carolina. Many of these newcomers, resenting the plantation elite who ran these colonies, ﬁ lled the ranks of Tory brigades such as the Volunteers of Ireland and the North Carolina Highlanders, orga nized by the British army to galvanize Loyalist support. Other ethnic minorities found their own reasons to support the British. Some members of Dutch, German, and French religious sects believed that religious tolerance would be greater under the British than under the Americans, whose prejudices they had already encountered. Above all, thousands of African Americans joined Loyalist ranks in the hope that ser vice to the British might offer an escape from bondage. British ofﬁcials encouraged that belief. Throughout the war and in every colony, some African Americans ﬂed to British lines, where they served as soldiers, servants, laborers, and spies. Many of them joined black regiments that specialized in making small sorties against Patriot militias. In Monmouth, New Jersey, the black Loyalist Colonel Tye and his band of raiders became legendary for capturing Patriots and their supplies. As the war drew to an end in 1783, the fate of black Loyalists varied enormously. Many thousands who came to Loyalism as fugitive slaves managed to ﬁ nd a way to freedom, most notably the large group who won British passage from the port of New York to Nova Scotia. Other African American Loyalists suffered betrayal. British general Lord Charles Cornwallis abandoned over four thousand former slaves in Virginia, and many black Loyalists who boarded ships from

 Loyalists Through British Eyes This British cartoon depicts the Loyalists as doubly victimized—by Americans caricatured as “savage” Indians and by the British prime minister, the Earl of Shelburne, for offering little protection to Britain’s defenders.

 British-controlled ports expecting to embark for freedom instead found themselves sold back into slavery in the West Indies. White Loyalists faced no threat of enslavement, but they did suffer travails beyond mere disgrace: arrest, exile, conﬁscation of property, and loss of legal rights. Faced with such retribution, some eighty thousand Loyalists ﬂed abroad, mostly to Britain and the maritime provinces of Canada, where they became known as the United Empire Loyalists. Some settled contentedly as exiles, but many, especially those who went to Britain, where they had difﬁculty becoming accepted, lived diminished and lonely lives—“cut off,” as Loyalist Thomas Danforth put it, “from every hope of importance in life . . . [and] in a station much inferior to that of a menial servant.”

 But most Loyalists remained in America, where they faced the special burdens of reestablishing themselves in a society that viewed them as traitors. Some succeeded remarkably despite the odds, such as Hugh Gaine, a printer in New York City who eventually reopened a business and even won contracts from the new government. Ironically, this former Loyalist soldier published the new national army regulations authored by the Revolutionary hero Baron von Steuben. Like many former Loyalists, Gaine reintegrated himself into public life by siding with the Federalist call for a strong central government and powerful executive. When New York ratiﬁed the Constitution in 1788, Gaine rode the ﬂoat at the head of the city’s celebration parade. He had, like many other former Loyalists, become an American.





 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

Patriots and Loyalists
 The War of Independence, strictly speaking, was a war within a war. Colonials loyal to the king (Loyalists) fought the American rebels (Patriots), while the rebels also fought the British redcoats (see “Makers of America: The Loyalists,” pp. 154–155). Loyalists were derisively called “Tories,” after the dominant political factions in Britain, whereas Patriots were called “Whigs,” after the opposition factions in Britain. A popular deﬁ nition of a Tory among the Patriots betrayed bitterness: “A Tory is a thing whose head is in Eng land, and its body in America, and its neck ought to be stretched.” Like many revolutions, the American Revolution was a minority movement. Many colonists were apathetic or neutral, including the Byrds of Virginia, who sat on the fence. The opposing forces contended not only against each other but also for the allegiance and support of the civilian population. In this struggle for the hearts and minds of the people, the British proved fatally inept, and the Patriot militias played a crucial role. The British military proved able to control only those areas where it could maintain a massive military presence. Elsewhere, as soon as the redcoats had marched on, the rebel militiamen appeared and took up the task of “political education”—sometimes by coercive means. Often lacking bayonets but always loaded with political zeal, the ragtag militia units served as remarkably effective agents of Revolutionary ideas. They convinced many colonists, even those indifferent to independence, that the British army was an unreliable friend and that they had better throw in their lot with the Patriot cause. They also mercilessly harassed small British detachments and occupation forces. One British ofﬁcer ruefully observed that “the Americans would be less dangerous if they had a regular army.” Loyalists, numbering perhaps 16 percent of the American people, remained true to their king. Families often split over the issue of independence: Benjamin Franklin supported the Patriot side, whereas his handsome illegitimate son, William Franklin (the last royal governor of New Jersey), upheld the Loyalist cause. The Loyalists were tragic ﬁgures. For generations the British in the New World had been taught ﬁdelity to the crown. Loyalty is ordinarily regarded as a major virtue—loyalty to one’s family, one’s friends, one’s country. If the king had triumphed, as he seemed likely to do, the Loyalists would have been acclaimed patriots, and defeated rebels like Washington would have been disgraced, severely punished, and probably forgotten.

 Many people of education and wealth, of culture and caution, remained loyal. These wary souls were satisﬁed with their lot and believed that any violent change would only be for the worse. Loyalists were also more numerous among the older generation. Young people make revolutions, and from the outset energetic, purposeful, and militant young people surged forward—ﬁgures like the sleeplessly scheming Samuel Adams and the impassioned Patrick Henry. His ﬂaming outcry before the Virginia Assembly—“Give me liberty or give me death!”—still quickens patriotic pulses. Loyalists also included the king’s ofﬁcers and other beneﬁciaries of the crown—people who knew which side their daily bread came from. The same was generally true of the Anglican clergy and a large portion of their congregations, all of whom had long been taught submission to the king. Usually the Loyalists were most numerous where the Anglican Church was strongest. A notable exception was Virginia, where the debt-burdened Anglican aristocrats ﬂocked into the rebel camp. The king’s followers were well entrenched in aristocratic New York City and Charleston, and also in Quaker Pennsylvania and New Jersey, where General Washington felt that he was ﬁghting in “the enemy’s country.” While his men were starving at Valley Forge, nearby Pennsylvania farmers were selling their produce to the British for the king’s gold. Loyalists were least numerous in New Eng land, where self-government was especially strong and mercantilism was especially weak. Rebels were the most numerous where Presbyterianism and Congregationalism ﬂourished, notably in New Eng land. Invading British armies vented their contempt and anger by using Yankee churches for pigsties.

The Loyalist Exodus
 Before the Declaration of Independence in 1776, persecution of the Loyalists was relatively mild. Yet they were subjected to some brutality, including tarring and feathering and riding astride fence rails. After the Declaration of Independence, which sharply separated Loyalists from Patriots, harsher methods prevailed. The rebels naturally desired a united front. Putting loyalty to the colonies ﬁ rst, they regarded their opponents, not themselves, as traitors. Loyalists were roughly handled, hundreds were imprisoned, and a few noncombatants were hanged. But there was no wholesale reign of terror comparable to

Washington in Retreat




New York Patriots Pull Down
 the Statue of King George III Erected after the repeal of the Stamp Act in 1766, this statue was melted down by the revolutionaries into bullets to be used against the king’s troops.

 that which later bloodied both France and Russia during their revolutions. For one thing, the colonists reﬂected Anglo-Saxon regard for order; for another, the leading Loyalists were prudent enough to ﬂee to the British lines. About eighty thousand loyal supporters of George III were driven out or ﬂed, but several hundred thousand or so of the mild Loyalists were permitted to stay. The estates of many of the fugitives were conﬁscated and sold—a relatively painless way to help ﬁ nance the war. Conﬁscation often worked great hardship, as, for example, when two aristocratic women were forced to live in their former chicken house for leaning Toryward. Some ﬁ fty thousand Loyalist volunteers at one time or another bore arms for the British. They also helped the king’s cause by serving as spies, by inciting the Indians, and by keeping Patriot soldiers at home to protect their families. Ardent Loyalists had their hearts in their cause, and a major blunder of the haughty British was not to make full use of them in the ﬁghting.

General Washington at Bay
 With Boston evacuated in March 1776, the British concentrated on New York as a base of operations. Here was a splendid seaport, centrally located, where the king could count on cooperation from the numerous Loyalists. An awe-inspiring British ﬂeet appeared off

 New York in July 1776. It consisted of some ﬁve hundred ships and thirty-ﬁve thousand men—the largest armed force to be seen in America until the Civil War. General Washington, dangerously outnumbered, could muster only eighteen thousand ill-trained troops with which to meet the crack army of the invader. Disaster befell the Americans in the summer and fall of 1776. Outgeneraled and outmaneuvered, they were routed at the Battle of Long Island, where panic seized the raw recruits. By the narrowest of margins, and thanks to a favoring wind and fog, Washington escaped to Manhattan Island. Retreating northward, he crossed the Hudson River to New Jersey and ﬁ nally reached the Delaware River with the British close at his heels. Tauntingly, enemy buglers sounded the foxhunting call, so familiar to Virginians of Washington’s day. The Patriot cause was at low ebb when the rebel remnants ﬂed across the river after collecting all available boats to forestall pursuit. The wonder is that Washington’s adversary, General William Howe, did not speedily crush the demoralized American forces. But he was no military genius, and he well remembered the horrible slaughter at Bunker Hill, where he had commanded. The country was rough, supplies were slow in coming, and as a professional soldier, Howe did not relish the rigors of winter campaigning. He evidently found more agreeable the bedtime company of his mistress, the wife of one of his subordinates—a scandal with which American satirists had a good deal of ribald fun.



 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

Washington Crossing the Delaware, by Emanuel Gottlieb Leutze, 1851 On Christmas Day, 1776, George
 Washington set out from Pennsylvania with twenty-four hundred men to surprise the British forces, chieﬂy Hessians, in their quarters across the river in New Jersey. The subsequent British defeat proved to be a turning point in the Revolution, as it checked the British advance toward Philadelphia and restored American morale. Seventy-ﬁve years later, Leutze, a German American immigrant who had returned to Germany, mythologized the heroic campaign in this painting. Imbued with the liberal democratic principles of the American Revolution, Leutze intended his painting to inspire Europeans in their revolutions of 1848. To that end, he ignored the fact that the Stars and Stripes held by Lieutenant James Monroe was not adopted until 1777; that Washington could not possibly have stood so long on one leg; that the colonists crossed the Delaware at night, not during the day; and that no African American would have been present. What Leutze did capture was the importance of ordinary men in the Revolutionary struggle and the tremendous urgency they felt at this particular moment in 1776, when victory seemed so elusive.

 Washington, who was now almost counted out, stealthily recrossed the ice-clogged Delaware River. At Trenton, on December 26, 1776, he surprised and captured a thousand Hessians who were sleeping off the effects of their Christmas celebration. A week later, leaving his campﬁ res burning as a ruse, he slipped away and inﬂicted a sharp defeat on a smaller British detachment at Princeton. This brilliant New Jersey campaign, crowned by these two lifesaving victories, revealed “Old Fox” Washington at his military best.

 Burgoyne’s Blundering Invasion London ofﬁcials adopted an intricate scheme for capturing the vital Hudson River valley in 1777. If successful, the British would sever New Eng land from the rest of the states and paralyze the American cause. The main invading force, under an actor-playwright-soldier, General John (“Gentleman Johnny”) Burgoyne, would

Bagging Burgoyne




 In this sermon, published in the Pennsylvania Gazette on April 18, 1778, a minister decried the brutality of the British army:

“


 The waste and ravage produced by this unhappy war are every where felt. Whereever our foes pervade, ruin and devastation follow after them; or rather, they march in their front, and on their right, and on their left, and in their rear they rage without controul. No house is sacred; no person secure. Age or sex, from blooming youth to decrepit age, they regard or spare not. And in the ﬁeld, how many of our countrymen and friends have fallen?

”


 push down the Lake Champlain route from Canada. General Howe’s troops in New York, if needed, could advance up the Hudson River to meet Burgoyne near Albany. A third and much smaller British force, commanded by Colonel Barry St. Leger, would come in from the west by way of Lake Ontario and the Mohawk Valley. British planners did not reckon with General Benedict Arnold. After his repulse at Québec in 1775, he had retreated slowly along the St. Lawrence River back to the Lake Champlain area, by heroic efforts keeping an army in the ﬁeld. The British had pursued his tattered force to Lake Champlain in 1776. But they could not move farther south until they had won control of the lake, which, in the absence of roads, was indispensable for carrying their supplies. While the British stopped to construct a sizable ﬂeet, the tireless Arnold assembled and ﬁtted out every ﬂoatable vessel. His tiny ﬂotilla was ﬁ nally destroyed after desperate ﬁghting, but time, if not the battle, had been won. Winter was descending, and the British were forced to retire to Canada. General Burgoyne had to start anew from this base the following year. If Arnold had not contributed his daring and skill, the British invaders of 1776 almost certainly would have recaptured Fort Ticonderoga. If Burgoyne had started from this springboard in 1777, instead of from Montréal, he almost certainly would have succeeded in his venture. (At last the apparently futile American invasion of Canada in 1775 was beginning to pay rich dividends.)

Revolutionary Standard of the Light-Horse of the City
 of Philadelphia, by John Folwell and James Claypoole, 1775 Silk ﬂags like this were used to identify military units. In an exercise known as “trooping the colors,” such ﬂags were regularly paraded before the troops so that soldiers could recognize their own units in the confusion of battle.

 General Burgoyne began his fateful invasion with seven thousand regular troops. He was encumbered by a heavy baggage train and a considerable number of women, many of whom were wives of his ofﬁcers. Progress was painfully slow, for sweaty axmen had to chop a path through the forest, while American militiamen began to gather like hornets on Burgoyne’s ﬂanks. General Howe, meanwhile, was causing astonished eyebrows to rise. At a time when it seemed obvious that he should be starting up the Hudson River from New York to join his slowly advancing colleague, he deliberately embarked with the main British army for an attack on Philadelphia, the rebel capital. As scholars now know, he wanted to force a general engagement with Washington’s army, destroy it, and leave the path wideopen for Burgoyne’s thrust. Howe apparently assumed that he had ample time to assist Burgoyne directly, should he be needed. General Washington, keeping a wary eye on the British in New York, hastily transferred his army to the vicinity of Philadelphia. There, late in 1777, he was defeated in two pitched battles, at Brandywine Creek and



 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

 Germantown. Pleasure-loving General Howe then settled down comfortably in the lively capital, leaving Burgoyne to ﬂounder through the wilds of upper New York. Benjamin Franklin, recently sent to Paris as an envoy, truthfully jested that Howe had not captured Philadelphia but that Philadelphia had captured Howe. Washington ﬁ nally retired to winter quarters at Valley Forge, a strong, hilly position some twenty miles northwest of Philadelphia. There his frostbitten and hungry men were short of about every thing except misery. This rabble was nevertheless whipped into a professional army by the recently arrived Prussian drillmaster, the profane but patient Baron von Steuben. Burgoyne meanwhile had begun to bog down north of Albany, while a host of American militiamen, scenting the kill, swarmed about him. In a series of sharp engagements, in which General Arnold was again shot in the leg at Québec, the British army was trapped. Meanwhile, the Americans had driven back St. Leger’s force at Oriskany. Unable to advance or retreat, Burgoyne was forced to surrender his entire command at Saratoga on October 17, 1777, to the American general Horatio Gates. Saratoga ranks high among the decisive battles of both American and world history. The victory immensely revived the faltering colonial cause. Even more important, it made possible the urgently needed foreign aid from France, which in turn helped ensure American independence.

Revolution in Diplomacy?
 France, thirsting for revenge against Britain, was eager to inﬂame the quarrel that had broken out in America. Stripped of its North American colonies, Britain would presumably cease to be a front-rank power. France might then regain its former position and prestige, the loss of which in the recent Seven Years’ War rankled deeply. For their part, the American revolutionaries badly needed help in the struggle to throw off the British yoke. The stage seemed set for the embattled new nation to make its diplomatic debut by sealing an alliance with France against the common British foe. Yet just as they stood for revolutionary political ideas at home, the rebellious Americans also harbored revolutionary ideas about international affairs. They wanted an end to colonialism and mercantilism. They strongly supported free trade and freedom of the seas. They hoped to substitute the rule of law for the ancient

 After concluding the alliance, France sent a minister to America, to the delight of one Patriot journalist:

“


 Who would have thought that the American colonies, imperfectly known in Europe a few years ago and claimed by every pettifogging lawyer in the House of Commons, every cobbler in the beer-houses of London, as a part of their property, should to-day receive an ambassador from the most powerful monarchy in Europe.

”


 reliance on raw power to arbitrate the affairs of nations. (When the new Republic’s great seal proclaimed “a new order for the ages”—novus ordo seculorum in Latin— the sentiment was meant to apply to international as well as domestic affairs.) The Continental Congress in the summer of 1776 had accordingly drafted a Model Treaty to guide the American commissioners it was about to dispatch to the French court. One of the treaty’s chief authors, John Adams, described its basic principles: “1. No political connection. . . . 2. No military connection. . . . 3. Only a commercial connection.” For a nascent nation struggling to secure its very existence, these were remarkably self-denying restrictions. Yet they represented an emerging school of thought, popular among enlightened ﬁgures in both Europe and America, that deemed history to have reached a momentous turning point when military conﬂ ict would be abandoned and the bonds of mutual commercial interest would guarantee peaceful relations among states. Many critics then and later have derided this dream of an imminent golden age as hopelessly naive and impractically utopian; yet it infused an element of idealism into American attitudes toward international affairs that has proved stubbornly persistent. When wily old Benjamin Franklin arrived in Paris to negotiate the treaty with France, he was determined that his very appearance should herald the diplomatic revolution the Americans hoped to achieve. In his clothing and demeanor, he affected a persona that deliberately violated every norm of diplomatic behavior. Instead of the customary ceremonial sword, he toted only a plain white walking stick. Forsaking ermined robes and fancy wigs, he sported homespun garments and a simple cap of marten fur. “Figure me,” he wrote

The French Alliance


 Benjamin Franklin in His Fabled Cap He left school at age ten and became a wealthy businessman, a journalist, an inventor, a scientist, a legislator, and preeminently a statesman-diplomat. He was sent to France in 1776 as the American envoy at age seventy, and he remained there until 1785, negotiating the alliance with the French and helping to negotiate the treaty of peace. His fame had preceded him, and when he discarded his wig for the fur cap of a simple “American agriculturist,” he took French society by storm. French aristocratic women, with whom he was a great favorite, honored him by adopting the high coiffure à la Franklin in imitation of his cap.

 to a friend, “very plainly dress’d, wearing my thin grey strait Hair, that peeps out under my only Coiffure, a ﬁ ne Fur Cap, which comes down my Forehead almost to my Spectacles. Think how this must appear among the Powder’d Heads of Paris.” He shocked the royal court, besotted as it was with pomp and protocol. But ordinary Parisians adored him as a specimen of a new democratic social order, devoid of pretense and ornament. When Franklin embraced and kissed the famed French philosopher Voltaire in a Paris theater, the spectators applauded wildly. Meanwhile, the diplomatic game intensiﬁed. After the humiliation at Saratoga in 1777, the British Parliament belatedly passed a mea sure that in ef-



 fect offered the Americans home rule within the empire. This was essentially all that the colonials had ever asked for—except independence. If the French were going to break up the British Empire, they would have to bestir themselves. Franklin now played skillfully on French fears of Anglo-American reconciliation. On February 6, 1778, France offered the Americans a treaty of alliance. It did not conform exactly to the terms of the Model Treaty Franklin had brought with him—an early example of practical self-interest trumping abstract idealism in America’s conduct of foreign affairs. Against its better judgment, the young Republic concluded its ﬁ rst entangling military alliance and would soon regret it. But the treaty with France also constituted an ofﬁcial recognition of America’s independence and lent powerful military heft to the Patriot cause. Both allies bound themselves to wage war until the United States had fully secured its freedom and until both agreed to terms with the common enemy. With those pledges, the American Revolutionary War now became a world war.

The Colonial War Becomes
 a Wider War Eng land and France thus came to blows in 1778, and the shot ﬁ red at Lexington rapidly widened into a global conﬂagration. Spain entered the fray against Britain in 1779, as did Holland. Combined Spanish and French ﬂeets outnumbered those of Britain, and on two occasions the British Isles seemed to be at the mercy of hostile warships. The weak maritime neutrals of Europe, who had suffered from Britain’s dominance over the seas, now began to demand more respect for their rights (see Table 8.1). In 1780 the imperious Catherine the Great of Russia took the lead in organizing the Armed Neutrality, which she later sneeringly called the “Armed Nullity.” It lined up almost all the remaining European neutrals in an attitude of passive hostility toward Britain. The war was now being fought not only in Europe and North America, but also in South America, the Caribbean, and Asia. To say that America, with some French aid, defeated Britain is like saying “Daddy and I killed the bear.” To Britain, struggling for its very life, the scufﬂe in the New World became secondary. The Americans deserve credit for having kept the war going until 1778, with secret French aid. But they did not achieve their



 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

Table 8.1 Britain Against the World
Britain and Allies


Enemy or Unfriendly Powers


Great Britain
Some Loyalists and Indians
 30,000 hired Hessians (Total population on Britain’s side: ca. 8 million)

Belligerents
 (Total population: ca. 39.5 million)

{


United States, 1775–1783
France, 1778–1783
Spain, 1779–1783
Holland, 1779–1783
 Ireland (restive)

Members of the
Armed Neutrality
 (with dates of joining)

{


Russia, 1780
Denmark-Norway, 1780
Sweden, 1780
Holy Roman Empire, 1781
Prussia, 1782
Portugal, 1782
 Two Sicilies, 1783 (after peace signed)

 independence until the conﬂ ict erupted into a multipower world war that was too big for Britain to handle. From 1778 to 1783, France provided the rebels with guns, money, immense amounts of equipment, about one-half of America’s regular armed forces, and practically all of the new nation’s naval strength. France’s entrance into the conﬂ ict forced the British to change their basic strategy in America. Hitherto they could count on blockading the colonial coast and commanding the seas. Now the French had powerful ﬂeets in American waters, chieﬂy to protect their own valuable West Indies islands, but in a position to jeopardize Britain’s blockade and lines of supply. The British, therefore, decided to evacuate Philadelphia and concentrate their strength in New York City. In June 1778 the withdrawing redcoats were attacked by General Washington at Monmouth, New Jersey, on a blisteringly hot day. Scores of men collapsed or died from sunstroke. But the battle was indecisive, and the British escaped to New York, although about one-third of their Hessians deserted. Henceforth, except for the Yorktown interlude of 1781, Washington remained in the New York area hemming in the British.

Blow and Counterblow
 In the summer of 1780, a powerful French army of six thousand regular troops, commanded by the Comte de Rochambeau, arrived in Newport, Rhode Island. The

 Americans were somewhat suspicious of their former enemies; in fact, several ugly ﬂare-ups, involving minor bloodshed, had already occurred between the new allies. But French gold and goodwill melted hard hearts. Dancing parties were arranged with the prim Puritan maidens; one French ofﬁcer related, doubtless with exaggeration, “The simple innocence of the Garden of Eden prevailed.” No real military advantage came immediately from this French reinforcement, although preparations were made for a Franco-American attack on New York. Improving American morale was staggered later in 1780, when General Benedict Arnold turned traitor. A leader of undoubted dash and brilliance, he was ambitious, greedy, unscrupulous, and suffering from a wellgrounded but petulant feeling that his valuable ser vices were not fully appreciated. He plotted with the British to sell out the key stronghold of West Point, which commanded the Hudson River, for £6,300 and an ofﬁcer’s commission. By the sheerest accident, the plot was detected in the nick of time, and Arnold ﬂed to the British. “Whom can we trust now?” cried General Washington in anguish. The British meanwhile had devised a plan to roll up the colonies, beginning with the South, where the Loyalists were numerous (see Map 8.2). The colony of Georgia was ruthlessly overrun in 1778–1779; Charleston, South Carolina, fell in 1780. The surrender of the city to the British involved the capture of ﬁve thousand men and four hundred cannon and was a heavier loss



War on the Frontier


 g. 1

NEW YORK
New York 
Washing


 American movements British movements American victory

 b

40°N


Philadelphia


NEW JERSEY

 DELAWARE

 VIRGINIA

 British victory

Charlottesville


La


 fa

Elk Hill
Richmond
Petersburg


Norfolk
Portsmouth


 e een

Hillsboro


Cornwallis,


Salisbury


May


Salem


 tte

Charlotte


Yorktown
Aug. 30–Oct. 19, 1781
Surrender of Cornwallis


NORTH CAROLINA 35°N

 lis

,1






Cheraw
Elizabethtown


 al

Fort
Charlotte


Co


 rn

Orangeburg


Wilmington nw
 r

 SOUTH wa CAROLINA llis

Cl


Georgetown


 in

 to

 n

 an

 d

Co


Charleston
May 12, 1780


GEORGIA
Savannah Oct. 9, 1779 
Battle
 of the Capes Sept. 5, 1781



Gr


Kings Mountain
Oct. 7, 1780


 ye

ATLANTIC OCEAN

Fort
Moultrie


Beaufort




100 Km.


Fort Sunbury
80°W






100 Mi.


De Grasse (Fr.
 ) from Wes t Indies, 1

Fort


Cowpens
Jan. 17, 1781


R


 am

 t on

 MARYLAND

 h oc

 an

 d

 ea

 u,

Au


 PENNSYLVANIA

N


75°W


Map 8.2 War in the South, 1780–1781
Interactive Map


 to the Americans, in relation to existing strength, than that of Burgoyne was to the British. Warfare now intensiﬁed in the Carolinas, where Patriots bitterly fought their Loyalist neighbors. It was not uncommon for prisoners on both sides to be butch-

 ered in cold blood after they had thrown down their arms. The tide turned later in 1780 and early in 1781, when American riﬂemen wiped out a British detachment at King’s Mountain and then defeated a smaller force at Cowpens. In the Carolina campaign of 1781,



 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

 General Nathanael Greene, a Quaker-reared tactician, distinguished himself by his strategy of delay. Standing and then retreating, he exhausted his foe, General Charles Cornwallis, in vain pursuit. By losing battles but winning campaigns, the “Fighting Quaker” ﬁ nally succeeded in clearing most of Georgia and South Carolina of British troops.

The Land Frontier and
 the Sea Frontier

La k e M i c h i g a


 n

 The West was ablaze during much of the war. Indian allies of George III, hoping to protect their land, were busy with torch and tomahawk; they were egged on by British agents branded as “hair buyers” because they

 allegedly paid bounties for American scalps. Fateful 1777 was known as “the bloody year” on the frontier. Although two nations of the Iroquois Confederacy, the Oneidas and the Tuscaroras, sided with the Americans, the Senecas, Mohawks, Cayugas, and Onondagas joined the British. They were urged on by Mohawk chief Joseph Brant, a convert to Anglicanism who believed, not without reason, that a victorious Britain would restrain American expansion into the West. Brant and the British ravaged large areas of backcountry Pennsylvania and New York until checked by an American force in 1779. In 1784 the pro-British Iroquois were forced to sign the Treaty of Fort Stanwix, the ﬁ rst treaty between the United States and an Indian nation. Under its terms the Indians ceded most of their land. Yet even in wartime, the human tide of westwardmoving pioneers did not halt its ﬂow. Eloquent testimony is provided by place names in Kentucky, such as Lexington (named after the battle) and Louisville (named after America’s new ally, Louis XVI). In the wild Illinois country, the British were especially vulnerable to attack, for they held only scattered posts that they had captured from the French. An audacious frontiersman, George Rogers Clark, conceived the idea of seizing these forts by surprise. In 1778–1779 he ﬂoated down the Ohio River with about 175 men and captured in quick succession the forts Kaskaskia, Cahokia, and Vincennes (see Map 8.3). Clark’s admirers have argued, without positive proof,





80°W


200 Km.


200 Mi.


Detroit


La


 ke

Eri


 e

Fort
Pitt
M


 is

90°W
 so

N


 Joseph Brant, by Gilbert Stuart, 1786 Siding with the British, this Mohawk chief led Indian frontier raids so ferocious that he was dubbed “monster Brant.” When he later met King George III, he declined to kiss the king’s hand but asked instead to kiss the hand of the queen.

 uri R.

Cahokia


Kaskaskia


Vincennes


Oh


40°N


 io R.

 Clark’s route, 1778–1779

 Map 8.3 George Rogers Clark’s Campaign, 1778–1779 Interactive Map

Setting the Stage for Victory


 Baron von Steuben (1730–1794), a Prussian general who helped train the Continental Army, found the Americans to be very different from other soldiers he had known. As von Steuben explained to a fellow European,

“


 The genius of this nation is not in the least to be compared with that of the Prussians, Austrians, or French. You say to your soldier, ‘Do this’ and he doeth it; but I am obliged to say, ‘This is the reason why you ought to do that,’ and then he does it.

”


 that his success forced the British to cede the region north of the Ohio River to the United States at the peace table in Paris. America’s infant navy had meanwhile been laying the foundations of a brilliant tradition. The naval establishment consisted of only a handful of nondescript ships, commanded by daring ofﬁcers, the most famous of whom was a hard-ﬁghting young Scotsman, John Paul Jones. As events turned out, this tiny naval force never made a real dent in Britain’s thunderous ﬂeets. Its chief contribution was in destroying British merchant shipping and thus carrying the war into the waters around the British Isles. More numerous and damaging than ships of the regular American navy were swift privateers. These craft were privately owned armed ships—legalized pirates in a sense—speciﬁcally authorized by Congress to prey on enemy shipping. Altogether over a thousand American privateers, responding to the call of patriotism and proﬁt, sallied forth with about seventy thousand men (“sailors of fortune”). They captured some six hundred British prizes, while British warships captured about as many American merchantmen and privateers. Privateering was not an unalloyed asset. It had the unfortunate effect of diverting manpower from the main war effort and involving Americans, including Benedict Arnold, in speculation and graft. But the privateers brought in urgently needed gold, harassed the enemy, and raised American morale by providing victories at a time when victories were few. British shipping was so badly riddled by privateers and by the regular American navy that insurance rates skyrocketed. Merchant ships were compelled to sail in convoy,



 and British shippers and manufacturers brought increasing pressure on Parliament to end the war on honorable terms.

Yorktown and the
Final Curtain
 One of the darkest periods of the war was 1780–1781, before the last decisive victory. Inﬂation of the currency continued at full gallop. The government, virtually bankrupt, declared that it would repay many of its debts at the rate of only 2.5 cents on the dollar. Despair prevailed, the sense of unity withered, and mutinous sentiments infected the army. Meanwhile, the British general Cornwallis was blundering into a trap. After futile operations in Virginia, he had fallen back to Chesapeake Bay at Yorktown to await seaborne supplies and reinforcements. He assumed Britain would continue to control the sea. But these few fateful weeks happened to be one of the brief periods during the war when British naval superiority slipped away. The French were now prepared to cooperate energetically in a brilliant stroke. Admiral de Grasse, operating with a powerful ﬂeet in the West Indies, advised the Americans that he was free to join with them in an assault on Cornwallis at Yorktown. Quick to seize this opportunity, General Washington made a swift march of more than three hundred miles to the Chesapeake from the New York area. Accompanied by Rochambeau’s French army, Washington beset the British by land, while de Grasse blockaded them by sea after beating off the British ﬂeet. Completely cornered, Cornwallis surrendered his entire force of seven thousand men on October 19, 1781, as his band appropriately played “The World Turn’d Upside Down.” The triumph was no less French than American: the French provided essentially all the sea power and about half of the regular troops in the besieging army of some sixteen thousand men. Stunned by news of the disaster, Prime Minister Lord North cried, “Oh God! It’s all over! It’s all over!” But it was not. George III stubbornly planned to continue the struggle, for Britain was far from being crushed. It still had ﬁ fty-four thousand troops in North America, including thirty-two thousand in the United States. Washington returned with his army to New York, there to continue keeping a vigilant eye on the British force of ten thousand men.



 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

Battle of the Chesapeake
 Capes, 1781 A young French naval ofﬁcer, Pierre Joseph Jennot, sketched what is probably the only depiction of the epochal sea battle by a participant. The British and French ﬂeets ﬁrst engaged on September 5 and for two days chased each other while drifting one hundred miles south. On September 8 the French turned back northward and occupied Chesapeake Bay, cutting off General Cornwallis, ashore in Yorktown, from support and escape by sea. When General Washington, with more French help, blocked any British retreat by land, a doomed Cornwallis surrendered.

 Fighting actually continued for more than a year after Yorktown, with Patriot–Loyalist warfare in the South especially savage. “No quarter for Tories” was the common battle cry. One of Washington’s most valuable contributions was to keep the languishing cause alive, the army in the ﬁeld, and the states together during these critical months. Otherwise a satisfactory peace treaty might never have been signed.

 personal rule of George III. A Whig ministry, rather favorable to the Americans, replaced the Tory regime of Lord North. Three American peace negotiators had meanwhile gathered at Paris: the aging but astute Benjamin Franklin; the ﬂ inty John Adams, vigilant for New Eng land interests; and the impulsive John Jay of New York, deeply

Peace at Paris
 After Yorktown, despite George III’s obstinate eagerness to continue ﬁghting, many Britons were weary of war and increasingly ready to come to terms. They had suffered heavy reverses in India and in the West Indies. The island of Minorca in the Mediterranean had fallen; the Rock of Gibraltar was tottering. Lord North’s ministry collapsed in March 1782, temporarily ending the

 Blundering George III, a poor loser, wrote this of America:

“


 Knavery seems to be so much the striking feature of its inhabitants that it may not in the end be an evil that they become aliens to this Kingdom.

”


Setting the Stage for Victory


 In 1800 the Prussian statesman Friedrich von Gentz (1764–1832) published an essay titled “Origins and Principles of the American Revolution, Compared with the French.” In it he argued that

“


 the Americans escaped the most dangerous of all the rocks, which in our times threatens the founders of any revolution: the deadly passion for making political experiments with abstract theories and untried systems.

”


 John Quincy Adams (1767–1848) translated von Gentz’s work into English, because, he said,

“


 it rescues [the American] revolution from the disgraceful imputation of having proceeded from the same principles as the French.

”


 suspicious of Old World intrigue. The three envoys had explicit instructions from Congress to make no separate peace and to consult with their French allies at all stages of the negotiations. But the American representatives chafed under this directive. They well knew that it had been written by a subservient Congress, with the French Foreign Ofﬁce indirectly guiding the pen. France was in a painful position. It had induced Spain to enter the war on its side, in part by promising to deliver British-held Gibraltar. Yet the towering rock was defying frantic joint assaults by French and Spanish troops. Spain also coveted the immense transAllegheny area, on which restless American pioneers were already settling. France, ever eager to smash Britain’s empire, desired an independent United States, but one independent in the abstract, not in action. It therefore schemed to keep the new Republic cooped up east of the Allegheny Mountains. A weak America—like a horse sturdy enough to plow but not vigorous enough to kick—would be easier to manage in promoting French interests and policy. France was paying a heavy price in men and trea sure to win America’s independence, and it wanted to get its money’s worth. But John Jay was unwilling to play France’s game. Suspiciously alert, he perceived that the French could not satisfy the conﬂ icting ambitions of both Ameri-



 cans and Spaniards. He saw signs—or thought he did— indicating that the Paris Foreign Ofﬁce was about to betray America’s trans-Appalachian interests to satisfy those of Spain. He therefore secretly made separate overtures to London, contrary to his instructions from Congress. The hard-pressed British, eager to entice one of their enemies from the alliance, speedily came to terms with the Americans. A preliminary treaty of peace was signed in 1782; the ﬁ nal peace, the next year. By the Treaty of Paris of 1783, the British formally recognized the independence of the United States. In addition, they granted generous boundaries, stretching majestically to the Mississippi on the west, to the Great Lakes on the north, and to Spanish Florida on the south. (Spain had recently captured Florida from Britain.) The Yankees, though now divorced from the empire, were to retain a share in the priceless ﬁsheries of Newfoundland. The Canadians, of course, were profoundly displeased. The Americans, on their part, had to yield important concessions. Loyalists were not to be further persecuted, and Congress was to recommend to the state legislatures that conﬁscated Loyalist property be restored. As for the debts long owed to British creditors, the states vowed to put no lawful obstacles in the way of their collection. Unhappily for future harmony, the assurances regarding both Loyalists and debts were not carried out in the manner hoped for by London. As for Britain, its acceptance of defeat in North America eventually paid enormous strategic dividends. Persisting in the colonial conﬂict might well have bled Britain dry. But shutting down the war against the Americans enabled London to rebuild its army and navy and eventually prevail in its titanic struggle with Napoleon—and to become the preeminent world power in the nineteenth century.

A
New Nation Legitimized  Britain’s terms were liberal almost beyond belief. The enormous trans-Appalachian area was thrown in as a virtual gift, for George Rogers Clark had captured only a small segment of it. Why the generosity? Had the United States beaten Britain to its knees? The key to the riddle may be found in the Old World. At the time the peace terms were drafted, Britain was trying to seduce America from its French alliance, so it made the terms as alluring as possible. The shaky Whig ministry, hanging on by its ﬁ ngernails for only a few



 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

The Reconciliation Between
Britannia and Her Daughter
 America (detail) America (represented by an Indian) is invited to buss (kiss) her mother. Compare this cartoon with the one on p. 127.

 months, was more friendly to the Americans than were the Tories. It was determined, by a policy of liberality, to salve recent wounds, reopen old trade channels, and prevent future wars over the coveted trans-Appalachian region. This farsighted policy was regrettably not followed by the successors of the Whigs. In spirit, the Americans made a separate peace— contrary to the French alliance. In fact, they did not. The Paris Foreign Ofﬁce formally approved the terms of peace, though disturbed by the lone-wolf course of its American ally. France was immensely relieved by the prospect of bringing the costly conﬂ ict to an end

 and of freeing itself from its embarrassing promises to the Spanish crown. America alone gained from the world-girdling war. The British, though soon to stage a comeback, were battered and beaten. The French savored sweet revenge but plunged headlong down the slippery slope to bankruptcy and revolution. The Americans fared much better. Snatching their independence from the furnace of world conﬂ ict, they began their national career with a splendid territorial birthright and a priceless heritage of freedom. Seldom, if ever, have any people been so favored.

Chronology




CHRONOLOGY
Battles of Lexington and Concord Second Continental Congress Americans capture British garrisons at Ticonderoga and Crown Point Battle of Bunker Hill King George III formally proclaims colonies in rebellion Failed invasion of Canada 
1778–


 Clark’s victories in the West



 Battle of King’s Mountain Battle of Cowpens Greene leads Carolina campaign French and Americans force Cornwallis to surrender at Yorktown

 Paine’s Common Sense Declaration of Independence Battle of Trenton



 North’s ministry collapses in Britain



Treaty of Paris




Battle of Brandywine
Battle of Germantown
Battle of Saratoga




Treaty of Fort Stanwix




 Formation of French-American alliance Battle of Monmouth





KEY TERMS
Second Continental Congress (146) Bunker Hill, Battle of (147) Olive Branch Petition (147) Hessians (148) Common Sense (150) Declaration of Independence (151) Declaration of the Rights of Man (152) Loyalists (156) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Patriots (156) Long Island, Battle of (157) Trenton, Battle of (158) Saratoga, Battle of (160) Model Treaty (160) Armed Neutrality (161) Fort Stanwix, Treaty of (164) privateers (165) Yorktown, Battle of (165) Paris, Treaty of (167) 
Ethan Allen
Benedict Arnold
Richard Montgomery
Thomas Paine
Richard Henry Lee
Lord Charles Cornwallis
William Howe
John (“Gentleman
Johnny”) Burgoyne


Benjamin Franklin
Comte de Rochambeau
Nathanael Greene
Joseph Brant
George Rogers Clark
Admiral de Grasse




 Chapter 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 1775–1783

Whose Revolution?


H


 istorians once assumed that the Revolution was just another chapter in the unfolding story of human liberty—an important way station on a divinely ordained pathway toward moral perfection in human affairs. This approach, often labeled the “Whig view of history,” was best expressed in George Bancroft’s ten-volume History of the United States of America, published between the 1830s and 1870s. By the end of the nineteenth century, a group of historians known as the “imperial school” challenged Bancroft, arguing that the Revolution was best understood not as the fulﬁ llment of national destiny, but as a constitutional conﬂ ict within the British Empire. For historians like George Beer, Charles Andrews, and Lawrence Gipson, the Revolution was the product of a collision between two different views of empire. While the Americans were moving steadily toward more self-government, Britain increasingly tightened its grip, threatening a stranglehold that eventually led to wrenching revolution. By the early twentieth century, these approaches were challenged by the so-called progressive historians, who argued that neither divine destiny nor constitutional quibbles had much to do with the Revolution. Rather, the Revolution stemmed from deepseated class tensions within American society. Once released by revolt, those tensions produced a truly transformed social order. Living themselves in a reform age when entrenched economic interests cowered under heavy attack, progressive historians like Carl Becker insisted that the Revolution was not just about “home rule” within the British Empire, but also about “who should rule at home” in America, the upper or lower classes. J. Franklin Jameson took Becker’s analysis one step further in his inﬂuential The American Revolution Considered as a Social Movement (1926). He claimed that the Revolution not only grew out of intense struggles between social groups, but also inspired many ordinary Americans to seek greater economic and political power, fundamentally democratizing society in its wake. In the 1950s the progressive historians fell out of favor as the political climate became more conser vative. Interpretations of the American Revolution as a class struggle did not play well in a country obsessed with the spread of communism, and in its place arose

 the so-called consensus view. Historians such as Robert Brown and Edmund Morgan downplayed the role of class conﬂ ict in the Revolutionary era, but emphasized that colonists of all ranks shared a commitment to certain fundamental political principles of self-government. The unifying power of ideas was now back in fashion almost a hundred years after Bancroft. Since the 1950s two broad interpretations have contended with each other and perpetuated the controversy over whether political ideals or economic and social realities were most responsible for the Revolution. The ﬁ rst, articulated most prominently by Bernard Bailyn, has emphasized ideological and psychological factors. Focusing on the power of ideas to foment revolution, Bailyn argued that the colonists, incited by their reading of seventeenth-century and early-eighteenth-century Eng lish political theorists, grew extraordinarily (perhaps even exaggeratedly) suspicious of any attempts to tighten the imperial reins on the colonies. When confronted with new taxes and commercial regulations, these hypersensitive colonists screamed “conspiracy against liberty” and “corrupt ministerial plot.” In time they took up armed insurrection in defense of their intellectual commitment to liberty. A second school of historians, writing during the 1960s and 1970s and inspired by the social movements of that turbulent era, revived the progressive interpretation of the Revolution. Gary Nash, in The Urban Crucible (1979), and Edward Countryman, in A People in Revolution (1981), pointed to the increasing social and economic divisions among Americans in both the urban seaports and the isolated countryside in the years leading up to the Revolution. Attacks by laborers on political elites and expressions of resentment toward wealth were taken as evidence of a society that was breeding revolutionary change from within, quite aside from British provocations. While the concerns of the progressive historians echo in these socioeconomic interpretations of the Revolution, the neoprogressives have been more careful not to reduce the issues simplistically to the one-ring arena of economic self-interest. Instead, they have argued that the varying material circumstances of American participants led them to hold distinctive

To Learn More


 versions of republicanism, giving the Revolution a less uniﬁed and more complex ideological underpinning than the idealistic historians had previously suggested. The dialogue between proponents of “ideas” and “interests” has gradually led to a more nuanced meeting of the two views. Most recently, scholars have taken a more transatlantic view of the Revolution’s origins, asking when and how colonists shifted from identifying as “British” to viewing themselves as “American.” Fred Anderson has argued that long before rebellion, the Seven Years’ War (1756–1763) helped create a sense of



 American identity apart from Britain. Other historians, such as T. H. Breen, argue that British nationalism actually intensiﬁed in the colonies over the course of the eighteenth century, as economic and cultural ties between Britain and North America strengthened through increased trade and the migration of ideas with the growth of print culture. Only when colonists realized that the British did not see them as equal imperial citizens, entitled to the same rights as Englishmen, did American nationalism emerge and Americans rebel.

To Learn More
David Armitage, The Declaration of Independence: A Global
History (2007)
Robert M. Calhoon, The Loyalists in Revolutionary America
(1973)
Colin G. Calloway, The American Revolution in Indian
Country (1995)
 Caroline Cox, A Proper Sense of Honor: Service and Sacriﬁce in George Washington’s Army (2004) Joseph J. Ellis, His Excellency: George Washington (2004) David Hackett Fischer, Washington’s Crossing (2004) James H. Hutson, John Adams and the Diplomacy of the American Revolution (1980) Linda K. Kerber, Women of the Republic: Intellect and Ideology in Revolutionary America (1980) Samuel E. Morison, John Paul Jones (1959)

Mary Beth Norton, The British-Americans: The Loyalist
Exiles in England (1972)
 ———, Liberty’s Daughters: The Revolutionary Experience of American Women (1980) Cassandra Pybus, Epic Journeys of Freedom: Runaway Slaves of the American Revolution and Their Global Quest for Liberty (2006) Alan Taylor, Liberty Men and Great Proprietors: The Revolutionary Settlement on the Maine Frontier, 1760– 1820 (1990) A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

 PART

 TWO

Building the
New Nation





1776–1860


B


 y 1783 Americans had won their freedom. Now they had to build their country. To be sure, they were blessed with a vast and fertile land, and they inherited from their colonial experience a proud legacy of selfrule. But history provided scant precedent for erecting a republic on a national scale. No law of nature guaranteed that the thirteen rebellious colonies would stay glued together as a single nation, or that they would preserve, not to mention expand, their democratic way of life. New institutions had to be created, new habits of thought cultivated. Who could predict whether the American experiment in gov-

 ernment by the people would succeed? The feeble national government cobbled together under the Articles of Confederation during the Revolutionary War soon proved woefully inadequate to the task of nation building. In less than ten years after the Revolutionary War’s conclusion, the Articles were replaced by a new Constitution, but even its adoption did not end the debate over just what form American government should take. Would the president, the Congress, or the courts be the dominant branch? What should be the proper division of authority between the federal government and the

 The Verdict of the People (detail) This election-day crowd exudes the exuberant spirit of the era of Andrew Jackson, when the advent of universal white male suffrage made the United States the modern world’s ﬁrst mass participatory democracy. Yet the black man with the wheelbarrow, literally pushing his way into the painting, is a pointed reminder that the curse of slavery still blighted this happy scene.

 states? How could the rights of individuals be protected against a potentially powerful government? What economic policies would best serve the infant Republic? How should the nation defend itself against foreign foes? What principles should guide foreign policy? Was America a nation at all, or was it merely a geographic expression, destined to splinter into several bitterly quarreling sections, as had happened to so many other would-be countries? After a shaky start under George Washington and John Adams in the 1790s, buffeted by foreign troubles and domestic crises, the new Republic passed a major test when power was peacefully transferred from the conser vative Federalists to the more liberal Jeffersonians in the election of 1800. A conﬁdent President Jefferson proceeded boldly to expand the national territory with the landmark Louisiana Purchase in 1803. But before long Jefferson, and then his successor, James Madison, were embroiled in what eventually proved to be a fruitless effort to spare the United States from the ravages of the war then raging in Europe. America was dangerously divided during the War of 1812 and suffered a humiliating defeat. But a new sense of national unity and purpose was unleashed in the land thereafter. President Monroe, presiding over this “Era of Good Feelings,” proclaimed in the Monroe Doctrine of 1823 that both of the American continents were off-limits to further European intervention. The foundations of a continental-scale economy were laid, as a “transportation revolution” stitched the country together with canals and railroads and turnpikes. Settlers ﬂooded over those new arteries into the burgeoning West, often brusquely shouldering aside the native peoples. Immigrants, especially from Ireland and Germany, ﬂocked to American shores. The combination of new lands, new labor, and revolutionary new technologies like the telegraph and the railroad fed the growth of a market economy, including the

Women Weavers at Work
 (detail) These simple cotton looms heralded the dawn of the Industrial Revolution, which transformed the lives of Americans even more radically than the events of 1776.

 commercialization of agriculture and the beginnings of the factory system of production. Old ways of life withered as the market economy drew women as well as men, children as well as adults, blacks as well as whites, into its embrace. Ominously, the slave system grew robustly as the production of cotton, mostly for sale on European markets, exploded into the booming Southwest. Meanwhile, the United States in the era of Andrew Jackson gave the world an impressive lesson in political science. Between roughly 1820 and 1840, Americans virtually invented mass democracy, creating huge political parties and enormously expanding political participation by enfranchising nearly all adult white males. Nor was the spirit of innovation conﬁ ned to the political realm. A wave of reform and cultural vitality swept through many sectors of American society. Utopian experiments proliferated. Religious revivals and even new religions, like Mormonism, ﬂourished. A national literature blossomed. Crusades were launched for temperance, prison reform, women’s rights, and the abolition of slavery. By the second quarter of the nineteenth century, the outlines of a distinctive American national character had begun to emerge. Americans were a diverse, restless people, tramping steadily westward, eagerly forging their own nascent Industrial Revolution, proudly exercising their democratic political rights, impatient with the old, in love with the new, testily asserting their superiority over all other peoples—and increasingly divided, in heart, in conscience, and in politics, over the single greatest blight on their record of nation making and democracy building: slavery.

The Confederation
 and the Constitution




1776–1790
 “The example of changing a constitution by assembling the wise men of the State instead of assembling armies will be worth as much to the world as the former examples we had given them.” THOMAS JEFFERSON 1789

T


 he American Revolution was not a revolution in the sense of a radical or total change. It did not suddenly and violently overturn the entire political and social framework, as later occurred in the French and Russian Revolutions. What happened was accelerated evolution rather than outright revolution. During the conﬂ ict itself, people went on working and praying, marrying and playing. Many of them were not seriously disturbed by the actual ﬁghting, and the most isolated communities scarcely knew that a war was on. Yet some striking changes were ushered in, affecting social customs, political institutions, and ideas about society, government, and even gender roles. The exodus of some eighty thousand substantial Loyalists robbed the new ship of state of conser vative ballast. This weakening of the aristocratic upper crust, with all its culture and elegance, paved the way for new, Patriot elites to emerge. It also cleared the ﬁeld for more egalitarian ideas to sweep across the land.

The Pursuit of Equality
 “All men are created equal,” the Declaration of Independence proclaimed, and equality was every where the watchword. Most states reduced (but usually did not eliminate altogether) property-holding requirements for voting. Ordinary men and women demanded to be addressed as “Mr.” and “Mrs.”—titles once reserved for the wealthy and highborn. Employers were now called “boss,” not “master.” In 1784 New Yorkers released a shipload of freshly arrived indentured servants, on the grounds that their status violated democratic ideals; by 1800 servitude was virtually unknown. Most Americans ridiculed the lordly pretensions of Continental Army ofﬁcers who formed an exclusive hereditary order, the Society of the Cincinnati. Social democracy was further stimulated by the growth of trade orga ni zations for artisans and laborers. Citizens

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



Aftermath of the Revolution


 in several states, ﬂushed with republican fervor, also sawed off the remaining shackles of medieval inheritance laws, such as primogeniture, which awarded all of a father’s property to the eldest son. A protracted ﬁght for separation of church and state resulted in notable gains. Although the well-entrenched Congregational Church continued to be legally established in some New Eng land states, the Anglican Church, tainted by association with the British crown, was humbled. De-anglicized, it re-formed as the Protestant Episcopal Church and was every where disestablished. The struggle for divorce between religion and government proved ﬁercest in Virginia. It was prolonged to 1786, when freethinking Thomas Jefferson and his co-reformers, including the Baptists, won a complete victory with the passage of the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom. (See Table 5.1, on established churches, on p. 97.) The egalitarian sentiments unleashed by the war likewise challenged the institution of slavery. Philadelphia Quakers in 1775 founded the world’s ﬁ rst antislavery society. Hostilities hampered the noxious trade in “black ivory,” and the Continental Congress in 1774 called for the complete abolition of the slave trade, a summons to which most of the states responded positively. Several northern states went further and either abolished slavery outright or provided for the gradual emancipation of blacks. Even on the plantations of Virginia, a few idealistic masters freed their human chattels—the ﬁ rst frail sprouts of the later abolitionist movement. But this revolution of sentiments was sadly incomplete. No states south of Pennsylvania abolished slavery, and in both North and South, the law discriminated harshly against freed blacks and slaves alike. Emancipated African Americans could be barred from purchasing property, holding certain jobs, and educating their children. Laws against interracial marriage also sprang up at this time. Why, in this dawning democratic age, did abolition not go further and cleanly blot the evil of slavery from

 The impact of the American Revolution was worldwide. About 1783 a British ship stopped at some islands off the East African coast, where the natives were revolting against their Arab masters. When asked why they were ﬁghting, they replied,

“


 America is free, Could not we be?

”




 Elizabeth “Mumbet” Freeman (ca. 1744–1829), by Susan Anne Livingston Ridley Sedgwick, 1811 In 1781, having overheard Revolutionary-era talk about the “rights of man,” Mumbet sued her Massachusetts master for her freedom from slavery. She won her suit and lived the rest of her life as a paid domestic servant in the home of the lawyer who had pleaded her case.

 the fresh face of the new nation? The sorry truth is that the ﬂedgling idealism of the Founding Fathers was sacriﬁced to political expediency. A ﬁght over slavery would have fractured the fragile national unity that was so desperately needed. “Great as the evil [of slavery] is,” the young Virginian James Madison wrote in 1787, “a dismemberment of the union would be worse.” Nearly a century later, the slavery issue did wreck the Union—temporarily. Likewise incomplete was the extension of the doctrine of equality to women. Some women did serve (disguised as men) in the military, and New Jersey’s new constitution in 1776 even, for a time, enabled women to vote. But though Abigail Adams teased her husband, John, in 1776 that “the Ladies” were determined “to foment a rebellion” of their own if they were not given political rights, most of the women in the



