Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


 “class struggle,” while many American liberals hung their heads. The evidence against the accused, though damaging, betrayed serious weaknesses. If the trial had been held in an at mosphere less charged with antiredism, the outcome might well have been only a prison term.

Hooded Hoodlums
 of the KKK A new Ku Klux Klan, spawned by the postwar reaction, mushroomed fearsomely in the early 1920s. Despite the familiar sheets and hoods, it more closely resembled the antiforeign “nativist” movements of the 1850s than the antiblack nightriders of the 1860s. It was antiforeign, anti-Catholic, antiblack, anti-Jewish, antipaciﬁst, anti-Communist, anti-internationalist, antievolutionist, antibootlegger, antigambling, antiadultery, and anti–birth control. It was also pro–Anglo-

 Saxon, pro–“native” American, and pro-Protestant. In short, the besheeted Klan betokened an extremist, ultraconser vative uprising against many of the forces of diversity and modernity that were transforming American culture. As reconstituted, the Klan spread with astonishing rapidity, especially in the Midwest and the Bible Belt South where Protestant Fundamentalism thrived. At its peak in the mid-1920s, it claimed about 5 million dues-paying members and wielded potent political inﬂuence. It capitalized on the typically American love of on-the-edge adventure and in-group camaraderie, to say nothing of the adolescent ardor for secret ritual. The “Knights of the Invisible Empire” included among their ofﬁcials Imperial Wizards, Grand Goblins, King Kleagles, and other horrendous “kreatures.” The most impressive displays were “konclaves” and huge ﬂag-waving parades. The chief warning was the blazing cross. The principal weapon was the bloodied lash, supplemented by tar and feathers. Rallying songs were

 Klanswomen on Parade, 1928 Founded in the Reconstruction era, the Ku Klux Klan enjoyed a remarkable resurgence in the 1920s. Here women members, unmasked and unapologetic, march down Pennsylvania Avenue under the shadow of the Capitol dome.

Immigration Restriction


 Hiram Wesley Evans (1881–1966), imperial wizard of the Ku Klux Klan, in 1926 poignantly described the cultural grievances that fueled the Klan and lay behind much of the Fundamentalist revolt against “Modernism”:

“


 Nordic Americans for the last generation have found themselves increasingly uncomfortable and ﬁnally deeply distressed. . . . One by one all our traditional moral standards went by the boards, or were so disregarded that they ceased to be binding. The sacredness of our Sabbath, of our homes, of chastity, and ﬁnally even of our right to teach our own children in our own schools fundamental facts and truths were torn away from us. Those who maintained the old standards did so only in the face of constant ridicule. . . . We found our great cities and the control of much of our industry and commerce taken over by strangers. . . . We are a movement of the plain people, very weak in the matter of culture, intellectual support, and trained leadership. . . . This is undoubtedly a weakness. It lays us open to the charge of being ‘hicks’ and ‘rubes’ and ‘ drivers of second-hand Fords.’

”


“The Fiery Cross on High,” “One Hundred Percent
American,” and “The Ku Klux Klan and the Pope”
 (against kissing the Pope’s toe). One brutal slogan was “Kill the Kikes, Koons, and Katholics.” This reign of hooded horror, so repulsive to the best American ideals, collapsed rather suddenly in the late 1920s. Decent people at last recoiled from the orgy of ribboned ﬂesh and terrorism, while scandalous embezzling by Klan ofﬁcials launched a congressional investigation. The bubble was punctured when the movement was exposed as a vicious racket based on a $10 initiation fee, $4 of which was kicked back to lcal organizers as an incentive to recruit. The KKK was an alarming manifestation of the intolerance and prejudice plaguing people anxious about the dizzying pace of social change in the 1920s. Despite the Klan’s decline, civil rights activists fought in vain for legislation making lynching a federal crime, as lawmakers feared alienating southern white voters.



Stemming the Foreign Flood
 Isolationist America of the 1920s, ingrown and provincial, had little use for the immigrants who began to ﬂood into the country again as peace settled soothingly on the war-torn world. Some 800,000 stepped ashore in 1920–1921, about two-thirds of them from southern and eastern Europe. The “one-hundred-percent Americans,” recoiling at the sight of this resumed “New Immigration,” once again cried that the famed poem at the base of the Statue of Liberty was all too literally true: they claimed that a sickly Europe was indeed vomiting on America “the wretched refuse of its teeming shore.” Congress temporarily plugged the breach with the Emergency Quota Act of 1921. Newcomers from Europe were restricted in any given year to a deﬁ nite quota, which was set at 3 percent of the people of their nationality who had been living in the United States in 1910.

 The Only Way to Handle It Isolationists and nativists succeeded in damming up the ﬂow of immigrants to the United States in the early 1920s. The Immigration Act of 1924 placed strict quotas on European immigrants and completely shut out the Japanese.



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


176,983


 Average annual inflow, 1907–1914

685,531
198,082


 Quotas under Act of 1921

 Quotas under Act of 1924 Quotas under NationalOrigins Provision of 1929 Quotas under McCarranWalter Act of 1952

158,367
140,999
21,847
132,323
20,251
125,165
29,492


 Immigrants from Northern and Western Europe Immigrants from other countries, principally Southern and Eastern Europe

 Figure 31.1 Annual Immigration and the Quota Laws The national-origins quota system was abolished in 1965. Legislation in that year capped the level of immigration at 170,000 per year but made exceptions for children, spouses, and parents of persons already arrived. It also restricted immigration from any single country to 20,000 people per year. The immigration laws were again signiﬁcantly revised in 1986, and changed twice more in 1990 and 1996. In the twenty-ﬁrst century, immigration laws remain highly controversial. (See pp. 987 and 1094.)

 This national-origins system was relatively favorable to the immigrants from southern and eastern Europe, for by 1910 immense numbers of them had already arrived. This stopgap legislation of 1921 was replaced by the Immigration Act of 1924. Quotas for foreigners were cut from 3 percent to 2 percent. The national-origins base was shifted from the census of 1910 to that of 1890, by which time comparatively few southern Europeans had arrived.* Great Britain and Northern Ireland, for example, could send 65,721 a year as against 5,802 for Italy. Southern Europeans bitterly denounced the device as unfair and discriminatory—a triumph for the “nativist” belief that blue-eyed and fair-haired northern Europeans were of better blood. The purpose was clearly to freeze America’s existing racial composition, which was largely northern European. A ﬂagrantly discriminatory section of the Immigration Act of 1924 slammed the door absolutely against Japa nese immigrants. Mass “Hate America” rallies erupted in Japan, and one Japa nese superpatriot expressed his outrage by committing suicide near the American embassy in

 *Five years later the Immigration Act of 1929, using 1920 as the quota base, virtually cut immigration in half by limiting the total to 152,574 a year. In 1965 Congress abolished the national-origins quota system.

 Tokyo. Exempt from the quota system were Canadians and Latin Americans, whose proximity made them easy to attract for jobs when times were good and just as easy to send back home when they were not. The quota system effected a pivotal departure in American policy. It claimed that the nation was ﬁ lling up and that a “No Vacancy” sign was needed. Immigration henceforth dwindled to a mere trickle. By 1931, probably for the ﬁ rst time in the American experience, more foreigners left than arrived. Quotas thus caused America to sacriﬁce something of its tradition of freedom and opportunity, as well as its future ethnic diversity (see Figure 31.1). The Immigration Act of 1924 marked the end of an era—a period of virtually unrestricted immigration that in the preceding century had brought some 35 million newcomers to the United States, mostly from Europe. The immigrant tide was now cut off, but it left on American shores by the 1920s a patchwork of ethnic communities separated from each other and from the larger society by language, religion, and customs. Many of the most recent arrivals, including the Italians, Jews, and Poles, lived in isolated enclaves with their own houses of worship, newspapers, and theaters (see “Makers of America: The Poles,” pp. 776– 777). Efforts to organize labor unions repeatedly foundered on the rocks of ethnic differences. Immigrant workers on the same shop ﬂoor might share a common

Prohibition


 interest in wages and working conditions, but they often had no common language with which to forge common cause. Indeed cynical employers often played upon ethnic rivalries to keep their workers divided and powerless. Ethnic variety thus undermined class and political solidarity. It was an old American story, but one that some reformers hoped would not go on forever. Immigration restriction did not appeal to all reformers. Particularly opposed was the chorus of “cultural pluralists” who had long criticized the idea that an American “melting pot” would eliminate ethnic differences. Two intellectuals, the philosopher Horace Kallen and the critic Randolph Bourne, championed alternative conceptions of the immigrant role in American society. At a time when war hysteria demanded the “one-hundred-percent Americanization” of German and Austrian immigrants, Kallen defended the newcomers’ right to practice their ancestral customs. In Kallen’s vision the United States should provide a protective canopy for ethnic and racial groups to preserve their cultural uniqueness. Like instruments in a symphony orchestra, each immigrant community would harmonize with the others while retaining its own singular identity. If Kallen stressed the preservation of identity, Bourne advocated greater cross-fertilization among immigrants. Cosmopolitan interchange, Bourne believed, was destined to make America “not a nationality but a trans-nationality, a weaving back and forth, with the other lands, of many threads of all sizes and colors.” In this view the United States should serve as the vanguard of a more international and multicultural age. Kallen’s pluralism and Bourne’s cosmopolitanism attracted a handful of other intellectuals to the defense of ethnic diversity, including progressives like John Dewey, Jane Addams, and Louis Brandeis. Vastly outnumbered in the debate over immigration restriction in the 1920s, these early proponents of “cultural pluralism” planted the seeds for the blooming of “multiculturalism” in the last quarter of the twentieth century.



 the Volstead Act passed by Congress later that year. Together these laws made the world “safe for hypocrisy.” The legal abolition of alcohol was especially popular in the South and West. Southern whites were eager to keep stimulants out of the hands of blacks, lest they burst out of “their place.” In the West prohibition represented an attack on all the vices associated with the ubiquitous western saloon: public drunkenness, prostitution, corruption, and crime. But despite the overwhelming ratiﬁcation of the “dry” amendment, strong opposition persisted in the larger eastern cities. For many “wet” foreign-born people, Old World styles of sociability were built around drinking in beer gardens and corner taverns. Yet most Americans now assumed that prohibition had come to stay. Everywhere carousers indulged in last wild ﬂ ings, as the nation prepared to enter upon a permanent “alcoholiday.” But prohibitionists were naive in the extreme. They overlooked the tenacious American tradition of strong drink and of weak control by the central government,

The Prohibition “Experiment”
 One of the last peculiar spasms of the progressive reform movement was prohibition, loudly supported by crusading churches and by many women. The arid new order was authorized in 1919 by the Eighteenth Amendment (see the Appendix), as implemented by

Texas Guinan, Queen of the Nightclubs Guinan is
 shown here in one of the “speakeasies” she operated in New York City during prohibition.

MAKERS OF

AMERICA
TheAfricanThe Great Poles American Migration 
T


 he Poles were among the largest immigrant groups to respond to industrializing America’s call for badly needed labor after the Civil War. Between 1870 and World War I, some 2 million Polish-speaking peasants boarded steamships bound for the United States. By the 1920s, when antiforeign feeling led to restrictive legislation that choked the immigrant stream to a trickle, Polish immigrants and their American-born children began to develop new identities as Polish Americans. The ﬁ rst Poles to arrive in the New World had landed in Jamestown in 1608 and helped to develop that colony’s timber industry. Over the ensuing two and a half centuries, scattered religious dissenters and revolutionary nationalists also made their way from Poland to America. During the Revolution about one hundred Poles, including two ofﬁcers recruited by Benjamin Franklin, served in the Continental Army. But the Polish hopefuls who poured into the United States in the late nineteenth century came primarily to stave off starvation and to earn money to buy land. Known in their homeland as za chlebem (for bread) emigrants, they belonged to the mass of central and eastern European peasants who had been forced off their farms by growing competition from the large-scale, mechanized agriculture of western Europe and the United States. An exceptionally high birthrate among the Catholic Poles compounded this economic pressure, creating an army of the land-poor and landless, who left their homes seasonally or permanently in search of work. In 1891 farmworkers and unskilled laborers in the United States earned about $1 a day, more than eight times as much as agricultural workers in the Polish province of Galicia. Such a magnet was irresistible. These Polish-speaking newcomers emigrated not from a uniﬁed nation, but from a weakened country that had been partitioned in the eighteenth century by three great European powers: Prussia (later Germany), Austria-Hungary, and Russia. The Prussian Poles, driven from their homeland in part by the antiCatholic policies that the German imperial government pursued in the 1870s, arrived in America ﬁ rst. Fleeing religious persecution as well as economic turmoil, many of these early immigrants came to the United



 States intending to stay. By contrast, most of those who came later from Austrian and Russian Poland simply hoped to earn enough American dollars to return home and buy land. Some of the Polish peasants learned of America from propaganda spread throughout Europe by agents for U.S. railroad and steamship lines. But many more were lured by glowing letters from friends and relatives already living in the United States. The ﬁ rst wave of Polish immigrants had established a thriving network of self-help and fraternal associations orga nized around Polish Catholic parishes. Often Polish American entrepreneurs helped their European compatriots

 Polish Coal Miners, ca. 1905 It was common practice in American mines to segregate mining crews by ethnicity and race.

 Solidarity Still, 1981 Many Polish Americans continue to take a keen interest in the fate of their ancestral land. In the 1980s many of them supported a challenge to the communist government led by a renegade trade union federation called Solidarity. Thousands rallied in Chicago, the home of the largest Polish community in the United States, to protest against Polish prime minister General Wojciech Jaruzelski (mocked here leashed to Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev), who had imposed martial law and ordered the mass arrest of Solidarity activists.

 make travel arrangements or ﬁ nd jobs in the United States. One of the most successful of these, the energetic Chicago grocer Anton Schermann, is credited with “bringing over” 100,000 Poles and causing the Windy City to earn the nickname the “American Warsaw.” Most of the Poles arriving in the United States in the late nineteenth century headed for booming industrial cities such as Buffalo, Pittsburgh, Detroit, Milwaukee, and Chicago. In 1907 four-ﬁ fths of the men toiled as unskilled laborers in coal mines, meatpacking factories, textile and steel mills, oil reﬁ neries, and garment-making shops. Although married women usually stayed home and contributed to the family’s earnings by taking in laundry and boarders, children and single girls often joined their fathers and brothers on the job. By putting the whole family to work, America’s Polish immigrants saved tidy sums. By 1901 about onethird of all Poles in the United States owned real estate,

 and they sent so much money to relatives in Austria and Russia that American and European authorities fretted about the consequences: in 1907 a nativist U.S. immigration commission groused that the huge outﬂow of funds to eastern Europe was weakening the U.S. economy. When an independent Poland was created after World War I, few Poles chose to return to their Old World homeland. Instead, like other immigrant groups in the 1920s, they redoubled their efforts to integrate into American society. Polish institutions like churches and fraternal orga ni zations, which had served to perpetuate a distinctive Polish culture in the New World, now facilitated the transformation of Poles into Polish Americans. When Poland was absorbed into the communist bloc after World War II, Polish Americans clung still more tightly to their American identity, pushing for landmarks like Chicago’s Pulaski Road to memorialize their culture in the New World.



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


 No More Moonshine Federal agents gloat over a captured still in Dayton, Ohio, in 1930. “Moonshiners,” or makers of illegal liquor, enjoyed a boom during prohibition, though zealous G-men (government agents) put the owner of this makeshift distillery out of business—at least temporarily.

 especially over private lives. They forgot that the federal authorities had never satisfactorily enforced a law where the majority of the people—or a strong minority—were hostile to it. They ignored the fact that one cannot make a crime overnight out of something that millions of people have never regarded as a crime. Lawmakers could not legislate away a thirst. Peculiar conditions hampered the enforcement of prohibition. Profound disillusionment over the aftermath of the war raised serious questions as to the wisdom of further self-denial. Slaking thirst became a cherished personal liberty, and many ardent wets believed that the way to bring about repeal was to violate the law on a large enough scale. Hypocritical, hipﬂasked legislators spoke or voted dry while privately drinking wet. (“Let us strike a blow for liberty” was an ironic toast.) Frustrated soldiers, returning from France, complained that prohibition had been “put over” on them while they were “over there.” Grimy workers bemoaned the loss of their cheap beer, while pointing out that the idle rich could buy all the illicit alcohol they wanted. Flaming youth of the jazz age thought it “smart” to swill bootleg liquor—“liquid ton-

 sillectomies.” Millions of older citizens likewise found forbidden fruit fascinating, as they engaged in “bar hunts.” Prohibition might have started off on a better foot if there had been a larger army of enforcement ofﬁcials.

 Automaker Henry Ford (1863–1947), an ardent prohibitionist, posted this notice in his Detroit factory in 1922:

“


 From now on it will cost a man his job . . . to have the odor of beer, wine or liquor on his breath, or to have any of these intoxicants on his person or in his home. The Eighteenth Amendment is a part of the fundamental laws of this country. It was meant to be enforced. Politics has interfered with the enforcement of this law, but so far as our organization is concerned, it is going to be enforced to the letter.

”


Organized Crime


 But the state and federal agencies were understaffed, and their snoopers, susceptible to bribery, were underpaid. The public was increasingly distressed as scores of people, including innocent bystanders, were killed by quick-triggered dry agents. Prohibition simply did not prohibit. The old-time “men only” corner saloons were replaced by thousands of “speakeasies,” each with its tiny grilled window through which the thirsty spoke softly before the barred door was opened. Hard liquor, especially the cocktail, was drunk in staggering volume by both men and women. Largely because of the difﬁculties of transporting and concealing bottles, beverages of high alcoholic content were popular. Foreign rumrunners, often from the West Indies, had their inning, and countless cases of liquor leaked down from Canada. The zeal of American prohibition agents on occasion strained diplomatic relations with Uncle Sam’s northern neighbor. “Home brew” and “bathtub gin” became popular, as law-evading adults engaged in “alky cooking” with toy stills. The worst of the homemade “rotgut” produced blindness, even death. The affable bootlegger worked in silent partnership with the friendly undertaker. Yet the “noble experiment” was not entirely a failure. Bank savings increased, and absenteeism in industry decreased, presumably because of the newly sober ways of formerly soused barﬂ ies. On the whole, probably less alcohol was consumed than in the days before prohibition, though strong drink continued to be available. As the legendary tippler remarked, prohibition was “a darn sight better than no liquor at all.”

The Golden Age
 of Gangsterism Prohibition spawned shocking crimes. The lush profits of illegal alcohol led to bribery of the police, many of whom were induced to see and smell no evil. Violent wars broke out in the big cities between rival gangs—often rooted in immigrant neighborhoods— who sought to corner the rich market in booze. Rival triggermen used their sawed-off shotguns and chattering “typewriters” (machine guns) to “erase” bootlegging competitors who were trying to “muscle in” on their “racket.” In the gang wars of the 1920s in Chicago, about ﬁve hundred mobsters were murdered. Arrests were few and convictions were even fewer, as the button-lipped gangsters covered for one another with the underworld’s code of silence. Chicago was by far the most spectacular example



Gangster Al Capone Fishing in Florida Capone may
 have looked like any Chicago businessman on vacation, but his business was bigger and nastier than most, as he often eliminated his competition by murder. He was reported as saying, “Everybody calls me a racketeer. I call myself a businessman. When I sell liquor, it’s bootlegging. When my patrons serve it on a silver tray on Lake Shore Drive, it’s hospitality.” He was ﬁnally jailed in 1932 for falsifying his incometax returns.

 of lawlessness. In 1925 “Scarface” Al Capone, a grasping and murderous booze distributor, began six years of gang warfare that netted him millions of bloodspattered dollars. He zoomed through the streets in an armor-plated car with bulletproof windows. A Brooklyn newspaper quipped, And the pistols’ red glare, Bombs bursting in air Give proof through the night That Chicago’s still there. Capone, though branded “Public Enemy Number One,” could not be convicted of the cold-blooded massacre, on St. Valentine’s Day in 1929, of seven disarmed members of a rival gang. But after serving most of an eleven-year sentence in a federal penitentiary for income-tax evasion, he was released as a syphilitic wreck.



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


 Gangsters rapidly moved into other proﬁtable and illicit activities: prostitution, gambling, and narcotics. Honest merchants were forced to pay “protection money” to the orga nized thugs; otherwise their windows would be smashed, their trucks overturned, or their employees or themselves beaten up. Racketeers even invaded the ranks of local labor unions as organizers and promoters. Organized crime had come to be one of the nation’s most gigantic businesses. By 1930 the annual “take” of the underworld was estimated to be from $12 billion to $18 billion—several times the income of the Washington government. Criminal callousness sank to new depths in 1932 with the kidnapping for ransom, and eventual murder, of the infant son of aviator-hero Charles A. Lindbergh. The entire nation was inexpressibly shocked and saddened, causing Congress in 1932 to pass the so-called Lindbergh Law, making interstate abduction in certain circumstances a death-penalty offense.

Monkey Business
 in Tennessee Education in the 1920s continued to make giant bootstrides. More and more states were requiring young people to remain in school until age sixteen or eigh-

 The Battle over Evolution Opponents of Darwin’s theories set up shop at the opening of the famed “Monkey Trial” in Dayton, Tennessee, in 1925. The trial was an early battle in an American “culture war” that is still being waged more than seventy-ﬁve years later.

 The bombastic Fundamentalist evangelist W. A. (Billy) Sunday (1862–1935) declared in 1925,

“


 If a minister believes and teaches evolution, he is a stinking skunk, a hypocrite, and a liar.

”


 teen, or until graduation from high school. The proportion of seventeen-year-olds who ﬁ nished high school almost doubled in the 1920s, to more than one in four. The most revolutionary contribution to educational theory during these yeasty years was made by mild-mannered Professor John Dewey, who served on the faculty of Columbia University from 1904 to 1930. By common consent one of America’s few front-rank philosophers, he set forth the principles of “learning by doing” that formed the foundation of so-called progressive education, with its greater “permissiveness.” He believed that the workbench was as essential as the blackboard, and that “education for life” should be a primary goal of the teacher. (For more on Dewey, see “Makers of America: Pioneering Pragmatists,” pp. 618–619.)

Science and Fundamentalism


 Science also scored wondrous advances in these years. A massive public-health program, launched by the Rockefeller Foundation in the South in 1909, had virtually wiped out the ancient afﬂ iction of hookworm by the 1920s. Better nutrition and health care helped to increase the life expectancy of a newborn infant from ﬁ fty years in 1901 to ﬁ fty-nine years in 1929. Yet both science and progressive education in the 1920s were subjected to unfriendly ﬁ re from the newly orga nized Fundamentalists. These devoted religionists charged that the teaching of Darwinian evolution was destroying faith in God and the Bible, while contributing to the moral breakdown of youth in the jazz age. Numerous attempts were made to secure laws prohibiting the teaching of evolution, “the bestial hypothesis,” in the public schools, and three southern states adopted such shackling mea sures. The trio of states included Tennessee, in the heart of the so-called Bible Belt South, where the spirit of evangelical religion was still robust. The stage was set for the memorable “Monkey Trial” at the hamlet of Dayton, in eastern Tennessee, in 1925. A likable high-school biology teacher, John T. Scopes, was indicted for teaching evolution. Batteries of newspaper reporters, armed with notebooks and cameras, descended upon the quiet town to witness the spectacle. Scopes was defended by nationally known attorneys, while former presidential candidate William Jennings Bryan, an ardent Presbyterian Fundamentalist, joined the prosecution. Taking the stand as an expert on the Bible, Bryan was made to appear foolish by the famed criminal lawyer Clarence Darrow. Five days after the trial was over, Bryan died of a stroke, no doubt brought on by the wilting heat and witnessstand strain. This historic clash between theology and biology proved inconclusive. Scopes, the forgotten man of the drama, was found guilty and ﬁ ned $100. But the supreme court of Tennessee, while upholding the law, set aside the ﬁ ne on a technicality.* The Fundamentalists at best won only a hollow victory, for the absurdities of the trial cast ridicule on their cause. Yet even though increasing numbers of Christians were coming to reconcile the revelations of religion with the ﬁ ndings of modern science, Fundamentalism, with its emphasis on a literal reading of the Bible, remained a vibrant force in American spiritual life. It was espe-

 *The Tennessee law was not formally repealed until 1967.



 cially strong in the Baptist Church and in the rapidly growing Churches of Christ, orga nized in 1906.

The Mass-Consumption
Economy
 Prosperity—real, sustained, and widely shared—put much of the “roar” into the twenties. The economy kicked off its war harness in 1919, faltered a few steps in the recession of 1920–1921, and then sprinted forward for nearly seven years. Both the recent war and Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon’s tax policies favored the rapid expansion of capital investment. Ingenious machines, powered by relatively cheap energy from newly tapped oil ﬁelds, dramatically increased the productivity of the laborer. Assembly-line production reached such perfection in Henry Ford’s famed Rouge River plant near Detroit that a ﬁ nished automobile emerged every ten seconds. Great new industries suddenly sprouted forth. Supplying electrical power for the humming new machines became a giant business in the 1920s. Above all, the automobile, once the horseless chariot of the rich, now became the carriage of the common citizen. By 1930 Americans owned almost 30 million cars. The nation’s deepening “love affair” with the automobile headlined a momentous shift in the character of the economy. American manufacturers seemed to have mastered the problems of production; their worries now focused on consumption. Could they ﬁ nd the mass markets for the goods they had contrived to spew forth in such profusion? Responding to this need, a new arm of American commerce came into being: advertising. By persuasion and ploy, seduction and sexual suggestion, advertisers sought to make Americans chronically discontented with their paltry possessions and want more, more, more. A founder of this new “profession” was Bruce Barton, prominent New York partner in a Madison Avenue ﬁ rm. In 1925 Barton published a best seller, The Man Nobody Knows, setting forth the provocative thesis that Jesus Christ was the greatest adman of all time. “Every advertising man ought to study the parables of Jesus,” Barton preached. “They are marvelously condensed, as all good advertising should be.” Barton even had a good word to say for Christ’s executive ability: “He picked up twelve men from the bottom ranks of business and forged them into an orga ni zation that conquered the world.”



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


 debt, and the economy became increasingly vulnerable to disruptions of the credit structure.

Putting America on
Rubber Tires


Babe Ruth: The “Sultan of Swat”


 Sports became big business in the consumer economy of the 1920s. Ballyhooed by the “image makers,” home-run heroes like George H. (“Babe”) Ruth were far better known than most statesmen. The fans bought tickets in such numbers that Babe’s hometown park, Yankee Stadium, became known as “the house that Ruth built.” In 1921 the slugging heavyweight champion, Jack Dempsey, knocked out the dapper French light heavyweight Georges Carpentier. The Jersey City crowd in attendance had paid more than a million dollars—the ﬁ rst in a series of million-dollar “gates” in the golden 1920s. Buying on credit was another innovative feature of the postwar economy. “Possess today and pay tomorrow” was the message directed at buyers. Once-frugal descendants of Puritans went ever deeper into debt to own all kinds of newfangled marvels—refrigerators, vacuum cleaners, and especially cars and radios—now. Prosperity thus accumulated an overhanging cloud of

 A new industrial revolution slipped into high gear in America in the 1920s. Thrusting out steel tentacles, it changed the daily life of the people in unprecedented ways. Machinery was the new messiah—and the automobile was its principal prophet. Of all the inventions of the era, the automobile cut the deepest track. It heralded an amazing new industrial system based on assembly-line methods and massproduction techniques. Americans adapted rather than invented the gasoline engine; Europeans can claim the original honor. By the 1890s a few daring American inventors and promoters, including Henry Ford and Ransom E. Olds (Oldsmobile), were developing the infant automotive industry. By 1910 sixty-nine car companies rolled out a total annual production of 181,000 units. The early contraptions were neither speedy nor reliable. Many a stalled motorist, profanely cranking a balky automobile, had to endure the jeer “Get a horse” from the occupants of a passing dobbin-drawn carriage. An enormous industry sprang into being, as Detroit became the motorcar capital of America. The mechanized colossus owed much to the stopwatch efﬁciency techniques of Frederick W. Taylor, a prominent inventor, engineer, and tennis player, who sought to elim inate wasted motion. His epitaph reads “Father of Scientiﬁc Management.” Best known of the new crop of industrial wizards was Henry Ford, who more than any other individual put America on rubber tires. His high and hideous Model T (“Tin Lizzie”) was cheap, rugged, and reasonably reliable, though rough and clattering. The parts of Ford’s “ﬂ ivver” were highly standardized, but the behavior of this rattling good car was so eccentric that it became the butt of numberless jokes. Lean and silent Henry Ford, who was said to have wheels in his head, erected an immense personal empire on the cornerstone of his mechanical genius, though his associates provided much of the orga ni zational talent. Ill-educated, this multimillionaire mechanic was socially and culturally narrow. “History is bunk,” he once testiﬁed. But he dedicated himself with one-track devotion to the gospel of standardization. After two early failures, he grasped and applied fully the technique of the moving assembly line—

The Automobile Age


 Fordism. He is supposed to have remarked that the purchaser could have his automobile in any color he desired—just as long as it was black. So economical were his methods that in the mid-1920s he was selling the Ford roadster for $260—well within the purse of a thrifty worker (see Figure 31.2). Before long, Fordism caught ﬁ re outside the United States. German engineers were particularly enamored, though their workers resented those “American methods.” The ﬂood of Fords was phenomenal. In 1914 the “Automobile Wizard” turned out his 500,000th Model T. By 1930 his total had risen to 20 million, or, on a bumper-to-bumper basis, more than enough to encircle the globe. A national newspaper and magazine poll conducted in 1923 revealed Ford to be the people’s choice for the presidential nomination in 1924. By 1929, when the great bull market collapsed, 26 million motor



 vehicles were registered in the United States. This ﬁgure, averaging 1 for every 4.9 Americans, represented far more automobiles than existed in all the rest of the world (see Figure 31.3).

Months
















(Model T
 introduced)

Figure 31.2 The Cost of a Model T Ford, 1908–
 1924 Henry Ford’s mass-production techniques cut the costs of production dramatically and put the automobile within reach of the workingperson’s purse. (Cost is shown in months of labor for an employee at the average national wage.)

 Total number of cars (in millions)



United States


France


Germany




Japan
Britain


















Year


Henry Ford in His First Car, Built in 1896 Ford has
 been called the “Father of the Trafﬁc Jam.”

Figure 31.3 International Comparison of Number
 of Automobiles



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


The Advent of
 the Gasoline Age The impact of the self-propelled carriage on various aspects of American life was tremendous. A gigantic new industry emerged, dependent on steel but displacing steel from its kingpin role. Employing directly or indirectly about 6 million people by 1930, it was a major wellspring of the nation’s prosperity. Thousands of new jobs, moreover, were created by supporting industries. The lengthening list would include rubber, glass, and fabrics, to say nothing of highway construction and thousands of ser vice stations and garages. America’s standard of living, responding to this infectious vitality, rose to an enviable level. New industries boomed lustily; older ones grew sickly. The petroleum business experienced an explosive development. Hundreds of oil derricks shot up in Cal i fornia, Texas, and Oklahoma, as these states expanded wondrously and the wilderness frontier became an industrial frontier. The once-feared railroad octopus, on the other hand, was hard hit by the competition of passenger cars, buses, and trucks. An ageold story was repeated: one industry’s gains were another industry’s pains. Other effects were widely felt. Speedy marketing of perishable foodstuffs, such as fresh fruits, was accel-

 Gas Station, 1923 Gas stations like this one began to appear about 1913. Before that the nation’s handful of automobile owners bought fuel from their local oil companies and stored it in tanks in their own yards.

 erated. A new prosperity enriched outlying farms, as city dwellers were provided with produce at attractive prices. Countless new roads ribboned out to meet the demand of the American motorist for smoother and faster highways, often paid for by taxes on gasoline. The era of mud ended as the nation made haste to construct the ﬁ nest network of hard-surfaced roadways in the world. Lured by sophisticated advertising, and encouraged by tempting installment-plan buying, countless Americans with shallow purses acquired the habit of riding as they paid. Zooming motorcars were agents of social change. At ﬁ rst a luxury, they rapidly became a necessity. Essentially devices for needed transportation, they soon developed into a badge of freedom and equality—a necessary prop for self-respect. To some, ostentation seemed more important than transportation. Leisure hours could now be spent more pleasurably, as tens of thousands of cooped-up souls responded to the call of the open road on joyriding vacations. Women were further freed from clinging-vine dependence on men. Isolation among the sections was broken down, and the less attractive states lost population at an alarming rate. By the late 1920s, Americans owned more automobiles than bathtubs. “I can’t go to town in a bathtub,” one homemaker explained. Other social by-products of the automobile were visible. Autobuses made possible the consolidation of

The Impact of the Automobile


 schools and to some extent of churches. The sprawling suburbs spread out still farther from the urban core, as America became a nation of commuters. The demon machine, on the other hand, exacted a terrible toll by catering to the American mania for speed. Citizens were becoming statistics. Not counting the hundreds of thousands of injured and crippled, the one millionth American had died in a motor vehicle accident by 1951—more than all those killed on all the battleﬁelds of all the nation’s wars to that date. “The public be rammed” seemed to be the motto of the new age. Virtuous home life partially broke down as joyriders of all ages forsook the parlor for the highway. The morals of ﬂaming youth sagged correspondingly— at least in the judgment of their elders. What might



 A lifelong resident of Muncie, Indiana, disguised as “Middletown” in Robert and Helen Lynd’s exhaustive investigation of American life in a typical medium-size community during the 1920s, pooh-poohed their scientiﬁc sociological methods:

“


 Why on earth do you need to study what’s changing this country? I can tell you what’s happening in just four letters: A-U-T-O!

”


 young people get up to in the privacy of a closed-top Model T? An Indiana juvenile court judge voiced parents’ worst fears when he condemned the automobile as “a house of prostitution on wheels.” Even the celebrated crime waves of the 1920s and 1930s were aided and abetted by the motorcar, for gangsters could now make quick getaways. Yet no sane American would plead for a return of the old horse and buggy, complete with ﬂy-breeding manure. The automobile contributed notably to improved air and environmental quality, despite its later notoriety as a polluter. Life might be cut short on the highways, and smog might poison the air, but the automobile brought more convenience, plea sure, and excitement into more people’s lives than almost any other single invention.

Humans Develop Wings


 The Modern Woman in the Driver’s Seat As part of its effort to sell to a mass market, the Ford Motor Company used advertising to convey that driving an automobile was respectable for women. A woman who drove was not only modern, but she also better fulﬁlled her traditional duties as a household manager.

 Gasoline engines also provided the power that enabled humans to fulﬁ ll the age-old dream of sprouting wings. After near-successful experiments by others with heavier-than-air craft, the Wright brothers, Orville and Wilbur, performed “the miracle at Kitty Hawk,” North Carolina. On a historic day—December 17, 1903—Orville Wright took aloft a feebly engined plane that stayed airborne for 12 seconds and 120 feet. Thus the air age was launched by two obscure bicycle repairmen. As aviation gradually got off the ground, the world slowly shrank. The public was made increasingly airminded by unsung heroes—often martyrs—who appeared as stunt ﬂ iers at fairs and other public gatherings. Airplanes—“ﬂying cofﬁ ns”—were used with marked success for various purposes during the Great War of 1914–1918. Shortly thereafter private companies began to operate passenger lines with airmail



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


Lucky Lindy Charles A.
 Lindbergh (1902–1974), stands in front of the aircraft that made him famous. The ﬁrst person to ﬂy solo across the Atlantic, Lindbergh became an acclaimed celebrity— perhaps the ﬁrst mediamade “hero” of the twentieth century. His shining reputation later lost some of its luster when he voiced antiSemitic sentiments and opposed American entry into World War II, though he went on to ﬂy several combat missions in the war against Japan.

 contracts, which were in effect a subsidy from Washington. The ﬁ rst transcontinental airmail route was established from New York to San Francisco in 1920. In 1927 modest and skillful Charles A. Lindbergh, the so-called Flyin’ Fool, electriﬁed the world with the ﬁ rst solo west-to-east conquest of the Atlantic. Seeking a prize of $25,000, the lanky stunt ﬂ ier courageously piloted his single-engine plane, the Spirit of St. Louis, from New York to Paris in a grueling thirtythree hours and thirty-nine minutes. Lindbergh’s exploit swept Americans off their feet. Fed up with the cynicism and debunking of the jazz age, they found in this wholesome and handsome youth a genuine hero. They clasped the soaring “Lone Eagle” to their hearts much more warmly than the bashful young man desired. “Lucky Lindy” received an uproarious welcome in the “hero canyon” of lower Broadway, as eighteen hundred tons of ticker tape and other improvised confetti showered upon him. Lindbergh’s achievement—it was more than a “stunt”—did much to dramatize and popularize ﬂying, while giving a strong boost to the infant aviation industry. The impact of the airship was tremendous. It provided the restless American spirit with yet another dimension. At the same time, it gave birth to a giant new industry. Unfortunately, the accident rate in the pioneer stages of aviation was high, though hardly more

 so than on the early railroads. But by the 1930s and 1940s, travel by air on regularly scheduled airlines was signiﬁcantly safer than on many overcrowded highways. Humanity’s new wings also increased the tempo of an already breathless civilization. The ﬂoundering railroad received another setback through the loss of passengers and mail. A lethal new weapon was given to the gods of war, and with the coming of city-busting aerial bombs, people could well debate whether the conquest of the air was a blessing or a curse. The Atlantic Ocean was shriveling to about the size of the Aegean Sea in the days of Socrates, while isolation behind ocean moats was becoming a bygone dream.

The Radio Revolution
 The speed of the airplane was far eclipsed by the speed of radio waves. Guglielmo Marconi, an Italian, invented wireless telegraphy in the 1890s, and his brainchild was used for long-range communication during World War I. Next came the voice-carrying radio, a triumph of many minds. A red-letter day was posted in November 1920, when the Pittsburgh radio station KDKA broadcast the news of the Harding landslide. Later miracles

Airplanes and Radio


Family “Listening In” to the Radio, 1922
 The Lacambanne family of San Francisco gathered in their parlor to listen to a concert broadcast over the radio. In the early years, when only a handful of households could afford a radio, listening brought family and neighbors together to share a common experience.

 were achieved in transatlantic wireless phonographs, radiotelephones, and television. The earliest radio programs reached only local audiences. But by the late 1920s, technological improvements made long-distance broadcasting possible, and national commercial networks drowned out much local programming. Meanwhile, advertising “commercials” made radio another vehicle for American free enterprise, as contrasted with the government-owned systems of Europe. While other marvels of the era—like the automobile—were luring Americans away from home, the radio was drawing them back. For much of the decade,

 Radio came in with a bang in the winter of 1921– 1922. A San Francisco newspaper reported a discovery that countless citizens were making:

“


 There is radio music in the air, every night, everywhere. Anybody can hear it at home on a receiving set, which any boy can put up in an hour.

”




 family and neighbors gathered around a household’s sole radio as they once had around the toasty hearth. Radio knitted the nation together. Various regions heard voices with standardized accents, and countless millions “tuned in” to perennial comedy favorites like “Amos ’n’ Andy.” Programs sponsored by manufacturers and distributors of brand-name products, like the “A&P Gypsies” and the “Eveready Hour,” helped to make radio-touted labels household words and purchases. Educationally and culturally, the radio made a signiﬁcant contribution. Sports were further stimulated. Politicians had to adjust their speaking techniques to the new medium, and millions rather than thousands of voters heard their promises and pleas. A host of listeners swallowed the gospel of their favorite newscaster or were even ringside participants in world-shaking events. Finally, the music of famous artists and symphony orchestras was beamed into countless homes.

 Hollywood’s Filmland Fantasies The ﬂ ickering movie was the fruit of numerous geniuses, including Thomas A. Edison. As early as the 1890s, this novel contraption, though still in crude form, had attained some popularity in the naughty peep-show penny arcades. The real birth of the movie came in 1903, when the ﬁ rst story sequence reached the screen. This breathless melodrama, The Great Train Robbery, was featured in the ﬁve-cent theaters, popularly called “nickelodeons.” Spectacular among the ﬁ rst full-length classics was D. W. Grifﬁth’s Birth of a Nation (1915), which gloriﬁed the Ku Klux Klan of Reconstruction days and defamed both blacks and Northern carpetbaggers. White southerners reputedly ﬁred guns at the screen during the attempted “rape” scene. African Americans were outraged at the ﬁ lm and angrily orga nized protest marches, petition campaigns, and public hearings. A fascinating industry was thus launched. Hollywood, in southern Cal i fornia, quickly became the movie capital of the world, for it enjoyed a maximum of sunshine and other advantages. Early producers featured nudity and heavy-lidded female vampires (“vamps”), and an offended public forced the screen magnates to set up their own rigorous code of censorship. The motion picture really arrived during World War I, when it was used as an engine of anti-German propaganda. Specially prepared “hang the kaiser” ﬁ lms



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


 In the face of protests against sex in the movies, the industry appointed a “movie czar,” Will H. Hays (1879–1954), who issued the famous “Hays Code” in 1934. As he stated in a speech,

“


 This industry must have toward that sacred thing, the mind of a child, toward that clean virgin thing, that unmarked slate, the same responsibility, the same care about the impressions made upon it, that the best clergyman or the most inspired teacher of youth would have.

”


 aided powerfully in selling war bonds and in boosting morale. A new era began in 1927 with the success of the ﬁ rst “talkie”—The Jazz Singer, starring the white performer Al Jolson in blackface. The age of the “silents” was ushered out as theaters every where were “wired for sound.” At about the same time, reasonably satisfactory color ﬁ lms were being produced. Movies eclipsed all other new forms of amusement in the phenomenal growth of their popularity. Movie “stars” of the ﬁ rst pulchritude commanded much larger salaries than the president of the United States, in some cases as much as $100,000 for a single picture. Many actors and actresses were far more widely known than the nation’s political leaders. Critics bemoaned the vulgarization of popular tastes wrought by the new technologies of radio and motion pictures. But the effects of the new mass media were not all negative. The insularity of ethnic communities eroded as the immigrants’ children, especially, forsook the neighborhood vaudeville theater for the downtown movie palace or turned away from Grandma’s Yiddish storytelling to tune in “Amos ’n’ Andy.” If some of the rich diversity of the immigrants’ Old Country cultures was lost, the standardization of tastes and of language hastened entry into the American mainstream—and set the stage for the emergence of a working-class political coalition that, for a time, would overcome the divisive ethnic differences of the past.

The Dynamic Decade
 Far-reaching changes in lifestyles and values paralleled the dramatic upsurge of the economy. The census of 1920 revealed that for the ﬁ rst time most Americans no

Margaret Sanger (1879–1966) in Boston, 1929
 Forbidden to speak on the inﬂammatory topic of birth control, a deﬁant Sanger covered her mouth and “lectured” in Boston by writing on a blackboard. Since 1912 Sanger had devoted herself to promoting birth control and establishing contraceptive clinics throughout the United States.

 longer lived in the countryside but in urban areas. Women continued to ﬁ nd opportunities for employment in the cities, though they tended to cluster in a few low-paying jobs (such as retail clerking and ofﬁce typing) that became classiﬁed as “women’s work.” An orga nized birth-control movement, led by the ﬁery feminist Margaret Sanger, openly championed the use of contraceptives. Alice Paul’s National Woman’s party began in 1923 to campaign for an Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution. (The campaign was still stalled short of success seven decades later.) To some defenders of traditional ways, it seemed that the world had suddenly gone mad. Even the churches were affected. The Fundamentalist champions of the old-time religion lost ground to the Modernists, who liked to think that God was a “good guy” and the universe a pretty chummy place. Some churches tried to ﬁght the Devil with worldly weapons. Competing with joyriding automobiles and golf links, they turned to quality entertainment of their own, including wholesome moving pictures for young

The Jazz Singer, 1927
 he Jazz Singer was the ﬁ rst feature-length “talkie,” a motion picture in which the characters actually spoke, and its arrival spelled the end for “silent” ﬁ lms, where the audience read subtitles with live or recorded music as background. Although moviegoers ﬂocked to The Jazz Singer to hear recorded sound, when they got there they found a movie concerned with themes of great interest to the urban, ﬁ rst- or second-generation immigrant audiences who were Hollywood’s major patrons. The Jazz Singer told the story of a poor, assimilating Jewish immigrant torn between following his father’s wish that he train as an Orthodox cantor and his own ambition to make a success of himself as a jazz singer, performing in the popular blackface style. The movie’s star, Al Jolson, was himself an immigrant Jew who had made his name as a blackface performer.

T


 White actors had gradually taken over the southern black minstrel show during the nineteenth century. By the early twentieth century, Jewish entertainers had entirely monopolized these roles. Jolson, like other Jewish blackface performers, used his ability to impersonate a black person to force his acceptance into mainstream white American society. This use of blackface seems ironic, since black Americans in the 1920s were struggling with their own real-life battles against Jim Crow–era segregation, a blatant form of exclusion from American society. Besides the novelty of being a “talkie,” what may have made The Jazz Singer a box ofﬁce hit in 1927? How might different types of viewers in the audience have responded to the story? What does the popularity of blackface reveal about racial attitudes at the time?





Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


 The Flapper New dance styles, like the “Charleston,” ﬂamboyantly displayed the new social freedom of the “ﬂapper,” whose dress and antics frequently ﬂummoxed the guardians of respectability.

 people. One uptown house of the Lord in New York advertised on a billboard, “Come to Church: Christian Worship Increases Your Efﬁciency.” Even before the war, one observer thought the chimes had “struck sex o’clock in America,” and the 1920s witnessed what many old-timers regarded as a veritable erotic eruption. Advertisers exploited sexual allure to sell every thing from soap to car tires. Oncemodest maidens now proclaimed their new freedom as “ﬂappers” in bobbed tresses and dresses. Young women appeared with hemlines elevated, stockings rolled, breasts taped ﬂat, cheeks rouged, and lips a “crimson gash” that held a dangling cigarette. Thus did the “ﬂapper” symbolize a yearned-for and devilmay-care independence (some said wild abandon) in some American women. Still more adventuresome females shocked their elders when they sported the new one-piece bathing suits. Justiﬁcation for this new sexual frankness could be found in the recently translated writings of Dr. Sigmund Freud. This Viennese physician appeared to argue that sexual repression was responsible for a variety of nervous and emotional ills. Thus not pleasure alone but also health demanded sexual gratiﬁcation and liberation. Many taboos ﬂew out the window as sex-conscious Americans let themselves go. As unknowing Freudians, teenagers pioneered the sexual frontiers. Glued together in rhythmic embrace, they danced to jazz music squeaking from phonographs. In an earlier day, a kiss had been the equivalent of a proposal of marriage. But in the new era, exploratory young folk sat in darkened movie houses or took to the highways and byways in

 automobiles. There the youthful “neckers” and “petters” poached upon the forbidden territory of each other’s bodies. If the ﬂapper was the goddess of the “era of wonderful nonsense,” jazz was its sacred music. With its virtuoso wanderings and tricky syncopation, jazz moved up from New Orleans along with the migrating The Guardian of Morality Women’s new one-piece bathing suits were a sensation in the 1920s. Here a check is carefully made to ensure that not too much leg is showing.

Dynamic Harlem




 Richard Müller-Freienfels (1882–1949), a German psychologist who was highly critical of the American obsession with mass production, extended his condemnation to the American people in 1929:

“


 Even the people impress one as having been standardized. All these clean-shaven men, all these girls, . . . seem to have been produced somewhere in a Ford factory, not by the dozen but by the thousand. In no other country are the individuals reduced to such a dead-level as in the United States.

”


 blacks during World War I. Tunes like W. C. Handy’s “St. Louis Blues” became instant classics, as the wailing saxophone became the trumpet of the new era. Blacks such as Handy, “Jelly Roll” Morton, and Joseph (“Joe”) King Oliver gave birth to jazz, but the entertainment industry soon spawned all-white bands—notably Paul Whiteman’s. Caucasian impresarios cornered the profits, though not the creative soul, of America’s most native music. A new racial pride also blossomed in the northern black communities that burgeoned during and after the war. Harlem in New York City, counting some 100,000 African American residents in the 1920s, was one of the largest black communities in the world. Harlem sustained a vibrant, creative culture that nourished poets like Langston Hughes, whose ﬁ rst volume

Marcus Garvey (1887–1940) In 1920 Garvey, the
 Jamaican-born founder of the United Negro Improvement Association, advocated a constitution to protect the rights of black Americans. By that year his nationalist self-help organization boasted eleven hundred branches in forty countries in the Americas and Africa. Most of those branches were located in the United States, his base of operations until 1927.

 King Oliver’s Creole Jazz Band, Early 1920s Joseph (“Joe”) King Oliver arrived in Chicago from New Orleans in 1918. His band became the ﬁrst important black jazz ensemble and made Chicago’s Royal Garden Café a magnet for jazz lovers. Left to right: Honoré Dutrey, trombone; Baby Dodds, drums; King Oliver, cornet; Lil Hardin, piano; Bill Johnson, banjo; and Johnny Dodds, clarinet. Kneeling in the foreground is the young Louis Armstrong.



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


 of verses, The Weary Blues, appeared in 1926. Harlem in the 1920s also spawned a charismatic political leader, Marcus Garvey. The Jamaican-born Garvey founded the United Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) to promote the resettlement of American blacks in their own “African homeland.” Within the United States, the UNIA sponsored stores and other businesses, like the Black Star Line Steamship Company, to keep blacks’ dollars in black pockets. Most of Garvey’s enterprises failed ﬁ nancially, and Garvey himself was convicted in 1927 for alleged mail fraud and deported by a nervous U.S. government. But the race pride that Garvey inspired among the 4 million blacks who counted themselves UNIA followers at the movement’s height helped these newcomers to northern cities gain selfconﬁdence and self-reliance. And his example proved important to the later founding of the Nation of Islam (Black Muslim) movement.

Cultural Liberation
 Likewise in literature, an older era seemed to have ground to a halt with the recent war. By the dawn of the 1920s, most of the custodians of an aging genteel culture had died—Henry James in 1916, Henry Adams in 1918, and William Dean Howells (“the Dean of American literature”) in 1920. A few novelists who had been popular in the previous decades continued to thrive, notably the well-to-do, cosmopolitan New Yorker Edith Wharton and the Virginia-born Willa Cather, esteemed for her stark but sympathetic portrayals of pioneering on the prairies. But in the decade after the war, a new generation of writers burst upon the scene. Many of them hailed from ethnic and regional backgrounds different from that of the Protestant New Eng landers who traditionally had dominated American cultural life. The newcomers exhibited the energy of youth, the ambition of excluded outsiders, and in many cases the smoldering resentment of ideals betrayed. They bestowed on American literature a new vitality, imaginativeness, and artistic quality. A patron saint of many young authors was H. L. Mencken, the “Bad Boy of Baltimore.” Little escaped his acidic wit. In the pages of his green-covered monthly American Mercury, he wielded a slashing rapier as much as a pen. He assailed marriage, patriotism, democracy, prohibition, Rotarians, and the middle-class American “booboisie.” The South he contemptuously dismissed as “the Sahara of the Bozart”

F.
Scott Fitzgerald and His Wife, Zelda  The Fitzgeralds are shown here in the happy, early days of their stormy marriage.

 (a bastardization of beaux arts, French for the “ﬁ ne arts”), and he scathingly attacked do-gooders as “Puritans.” Puritanism, he jibed, was “the haunting fear that someone, somewhere, might be happy.” The war had jolted many young writers out of their complacency about traditional values and literary standards. With their pens they probed for new codes of morals and understanding, as well as fresh forms of expression. F. Scott Fitzgerald, a handsome Minnesota-born Princetonian then only twenty-four years old, became an overnight celebrity when he published This Side of Paradise in 1920. The book became a kind of Bible for the young. It was eagerly devoured by aspiring ﬂappers and their ardent wooers, many of whom affected an air of bewildered abandon toward life. Catching the spirit of the hour (often about 4 a.m.), Fitzgerald found “all gods dead, all wars

The Flowering of Literature


 fought, all faiths in man shaken.” He followed this melancholy success with The Great Gatsby (1925), a brilliant commentary on the illusory American ideal of the self-made man. Midwesterner James Gatz reinvented himself as tycoon Jay Gatsby, only to be destroyed by the power of those with established wealth and social standing. Theodore Dreiser’s masterpiece of 1925, An American Tragedy, similarly explored the pitfalls of social striving, as it dealt with the murder of a pregnant working girl by her socially ambitious young lover. Ernest Hemingway, who had seen action on the Italian front in 1917, was among the writers most affected by the war. He responded to pernicious propaganda and the overblown appeal to patriotism by devising his own lean, word-sparing but word-perfect style. In The Sun Also Rises (1926), he told of disillusioned, spiritually numb American expatriates in Europe. In A Farewell to Arms (1929), he crafted one of the ﬁ nest novels in any language about the war experience. A troubled soul, he ﬁ nally blew out his brains with a shotgun blast in 1961. Other writers turned to a caustic probing of American small-town life. Sherwood Anderson dissected various ﬁctional personalities in Winesburg, Ohio (1919), ﬁ nding them all in some way warped by their cramped psychological surroundings. Sinclair Lewis, a hotheaded, heavy-drinking journalist from Sauk Centre, Minnesota, sprang into prominence in 1920 with Main Street, the story of one woman’s unsuccessful war against provincialism. In Babbitt (1922) he affectionately pilloried George F. Babbitt, a prosperous, vulgar, middle-class real estate broker who slavishly conforms to the respectable materialism of his group. The word Babbittry was quickly coined to describe his all-too-familiar lifestyle. Hemingway, Anderson, and many other writers and painters found shelter and inspiration in the Paris salon of Gertrude Stein, an expatriate American. A literary innovator in her own right, Stein wrote experimental poetry and prose, including Three Lives (1909), Tender Buttons (1914), and, most famously, The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas (1933), named for her lifelong partner. William Faulkner, a dark-eyed, pensive Mississippian, turned his attention to a ﬁctional chronicle of an imaginary, history-rich Deep South county he named “Yoknapatawpha.” In powerful books like The Sound and the Fury (1929) and As I Lay Dying (1930), Faulkner peeled back layers of time and consciousness from the constricted souls of his ingrown southern characters. His extended meditation on “the rag-tag



 and bob-ends of old tales and talkings” culminated in what some readers consider his greatest work, Absalom, Absalom! (1936). Nowhere was innovation in the 1920s more obvious than in poetry. Ezra Pound, a brilliantly erratic Idahoan who deserted America for Europe, rejected what he called “an old bitch civilization, gone in the teeth” and proclaimed his doctrine: “Make It New.” Pound strongly inﬂuenced the Missouri-born and Harvard-educated T. S. Eliot, who took up residence in Eng land. In “The Waste Land” (1922), Eliot produced one of the most impenetrable but inﬂuential poems of the century. Robert Frost, a San Francisco–born poet, wrote hauntingly about his adopted New Eng land. The most daringly innovative of all was e.e. cummings, who relied on unorthodox diction and peculiar typesetting to produce startling poetical effects.

Langston Hughes (1902–1967) Raised in the Midwest,
 Hughes arrived in New York City in 1921 to attend Columbia University. He spent most of his life in Harlem, making it so much the center of his proliﬁc and versatile literary career that he was often introduced as “the Poet Laureate of Harlem.”



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


 Langston Hughes (1902–1967) celebrated Harlem’s role in energizing a generation of artists and writers in his poem “Esthete in Harlem” (1930):

“


Strange,
 That in this nigger place I should meet life face to face; When, for years, I had been seeking Life in places gentler-speaking, Until I came to this vile street And found Life stepping on my feet!

”


*


 On the stage, Eugene O’Neill, a New York dramatist and Princeton dropout of globe-trotting background, laid bare Freudian notions of sex in plays like Strange Interlude (1928). A prodigious playwright, he authored more than a dozen productions in the 1920s and won the Nobel Prize in 1936. O’Neill arose from New York’s Greenwich Village, which before and after the war was a seething cauldron of writers, painters, musicians, actors, and other would-be artists. After the war a black cultural renaissance also took root uptown in Harlem, led by such gifted writers as Claude McKay, Langston Hughes, and Zora Neale Hurston, and by jazz artists like Louis Armstrong and Eubie Blake. In an outpouring of creative expression called the Harlem Renaissance, they proudly exulted in their black culture and argued for a “New Negro” who was a full citizen and a social equal to whites. Architecture also reinvented itself as modern—in diverse ways. At one extreme, Frank Lloyd Wright advanced the theory that buildings should grow from their sites, incorporate indigenous materials, and not slavishly imitate Greek and Roman importations. In a very different kind of paean to modern America, the machine age outdid itself in New York City when it thrust upward the cloud-brushing Empire State Building, 102 stories high. Dedicated in 1931, the “Empty State Building” towered partially vacant during the depressed 1930s.

 *“Esthete in Harlem,” from The Collected Poems of Langston Hughes by Langston Hughes, edited by Arnold Rampersad with David Roessel, Associate Editor. Copyright ©1994 by the Estate of Langston Hughes. Used by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, a division of Random House, Inc.

 Wall Street’s Big Bull Market Signals abounded that the economic joyride might end in a crash; even in the best years of the 1920s, several hundred banks failed annually. This something-fornothing craze was well illustrated by real estate speculation, especially the fantastic Florida boom that culminated in 1925. Numerous underwater lots were sold to eager purchasers for preposterous sums. The whole wildcat scheme collapsed when the peninsula was devastated by a West Indian hurricane, which belied advertisements of a “soothing tropical wind.” The stock exchange provided even greater sensations. Speculation ran wild, and an orgy of boomor-bust trading pushed the market up to dizzy peaks. “Never sell America short” and “Be a bull on America” were favorite catchwords, as Wall Street bulls gored one another and ﬂeeced greedy lambs. The stock market became a veritable gambling den. As the 1920s lurched forward, everybody seemed to be buying stocks “on margin”—that is, with a small down payment. Barbers, stenographers, and elevator operators cashed in on “hot tips” picked up while on duty. One valet was reported to have parlayed his wages into a quarter of a million dollars. “The cash register crashed the social register,” as rags-to-riches Americans reverently worshiped at the altar of the ticker-tape machine. So powerful was the intoxicant of quick proﬁts that few heeded the voices raised in certain quarters to warn that this kind of tinsel prosperity could not last forever. Little was done by Washington to curb moneymad speculators. In the wartime days of Wilson, the national debt had rocketed from the 1914 ﬁgure of $1,188,235,400 to the 1921 peak of $23,976,250,608. Conservative principles of money management pointed to a diversion of surplus funds to reduce this ﬁ nancial burden. A businesslike move toward economic sanity was made in 1921, when a Republican Congress created the Bureau of the Budget. The bureau’s director was to assist the president in preparing careful estimates of receipts and expenditures for submission to Congress as the annual budget. This new reform, long overdue, was designed in part to prevent haphazardly extravagant appropriations. The burdensome taxes inherited from the war were especially distasteful to Secretary of the Treasury Mellon, as well as to his fellow millionaires. Their theory

 Wall Street's Big Bull Market



 Calvin Coolidge Presides over the “Jazz Age” Coolidge’s hands-off policies were sweet music to big business.

 was that such high levies forced the rich to invest in tax-exempt securities rather than in the factories that provided prosperous payrolls. The Mellonites also argued, with considerable persuasiveness, that high taxes not only discouraged business but, in so doing, also brought a smaller net return to the Treasury than moderate taxes. Seeking to succor the “poor” rich people, Mellon helped engineer a series of tax reductions from 1921 to 1926. Congress followed his lead by repealing the excess-proﬁts tax, abolishing the gift tax, and reducing excise taxes, the surtax, the income tax, and estate taxes. In 1921 a wealthy person with an income of $1 million had paid $663,000 in income taxes; in 1926 the same person paid about $200,000. Secretary Mellon’s spare-the-rich policies thus shifted much of the

 tax burden from the wealthy to the middle-income groups. Mellon, lionized by conser vatives as the “greatest secretary of the Treasury since Hamilton,” remains a controversial ﬁgure. True, he reduced the national debt by $10 billion—from about $26 billion to $16 billion. But foes of the emaciated multimillionaire charged that he should have bitten an even larger chunk out of the debt, especially while the country was pulsating with prosperity. He was also accused of indirectly encouraging the bull market. If he had absorbed more of the national income in taxes, there would have been less money left for frenzied speculation. His refusal to do so typiﬁed the single-mindedly probusiness regime that dominated the political scene throughout the postwar decade.



Chapter 31 American Life in the “Roaring Twenties,” 1919–1929


 CHRONOLOGY

 Wright brothers ﬂy ﬁ rst airplane First story-sequence motion picture



 Henry Ford introduces Model T



Bolshevik Revolution in Russia




 Eighteenth Amendment (prohibition) Volstead Act Seattle general strike Anderson publishes Winesburg, Ohio



 Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) proposed



Immigration Act of 1924




 Scopes trial Florida real estate boom Fitzgerald publishes The Great Gatsby Dreiser publishes An American Tragedy



 Hughes publishes The Weary Blues Hemingway publishes The Sun Also Rises

1919–


 “Red scare”





 Lindbergh ﬂ ies solo across Atlantic First talking motion picture, The Jazz Singer Sacco and Vanzetti executed

 Radio broadcasting begins Fitzgerald publishes This Side of Paradise Lewis publishes Main Street



 Faulkner publishes The Sound and the Fury Hemingway publishes A Farewell to Arms



 Al Capone imprisoned



 Sacco-Vanzetti trial Emergency Quota Act Bureau of the Budget created



 Lewis publishes Babbitt Eliot publishes “The Waste Land”

KEY TERMS
Bolshevik Revolution (770) red scare (771) criminal syndicalism laws (771) American plan (771) Ku Klux Klan (772) Bible Belt (772) Immigration Act of 1924 (774) Eighteenth Amendment (775) 
PEOPLE TO KNOW
Volstead Act (775) racketeers (780) Fundamentalism (781) Scientiﬁc Management (782) Fordism (783) United Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) (792) 
A.
Mitchell Palmer Nicola Sacco
Bartolomeo Vanzetti
Horace Kallen
Randolph Bourne
Al Capone


John T. Scopes
Frederick W. Taylor
Henry Ford
Charles A. Lindbergh
Sigmund Freud


To Learn More




To Learn More
Casey Nelson Blake, Beloved Community: The Cultural
Criticism of Randolph Bourne, Van Wyck Brooks, Waldo
Frank, and Lewis Mumford (1990)
Nancy Cott, The Grounding of Modern Feminism (1987)
Lynn Dumenil, The Modern Temper: America in the
Twenties (1995)
John Higham, Strangers in the Land: Patterns of American
Nativism, 1860–1925 (1955)
Edward J. Larsen, Summer for the Gods: The Scopes Trial
 and America’s Continuing Debate over Science and Religion (1997) William Leuchtenburg, The Perils of Prosperity, 1914–1932 (1958)

David Levering Lewis, When Harlem Was in Vogue (1981)
 Nancy MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry: The Making of the Second KKK (1993) Roland Marchand, Advertising the American Dream: Making Way for Modernity, 1920–1940 (1985) Mae M. Ngai, Impossible Subjects: Illegal Aliens and the Making of Modern America (2004) A complete, annotated bibliography for this chapter—along with brief descriptions of the People to Know and additional review materials—may be found at www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e

The Politics of
Boom and Bust





1920–1932
 We in America today are nearer to the ﬁnal triumph over poverty than ever before in the history of any land. We have not yet reached the goal—but . . . we shall soon, with the help of God, be in sight of the day when poverty will be banished from this nation. HERBERT HOOVER, 1928

T


 hree Republican presidents—Warren G. Harding, Calvin Coolidge, and Herbert Hoover—steered the nation on the roller-coaster ride of the 1920s, a thrilling ascent from the depths of post–World War I recession to breathtaking heights of prosperity, followed by a terrifying crash into the Great Depression. In a retreat from progressive reform, Republicans sought to serve the public good less by direct government action and more through cooperation with big business. Some corrupt ofﬁcials served themselves as well, exploiting public resources for personal proﬁt. Meanwhile, the United States retreated from its brief internationalist ﬂ ing during World War I and resumed with a vengeance its traditional foreign policy of military unpreparedness and political isolationism.

The Republican
“Old Guard” Returns
 Warren G. Harding, inaugurated in 1921, looked presidential. With erect ﬁgure, broad shoulders, high forehead, bushy eyebrows, and graying hair, he was one of the best-liked men of his generation. An easygoing, warm-handed backslapper, he exuded graciousness and love of people. So kindly was his nature that he would brush off ants rather than crush them. Yet the charming, smiling exterior concealed a weak, inept interior. With a mediocre mind, Harding quickly found himself beyond his depth in the presidency. “God! What a job!” was his anguished cry on one occasion.

 This icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on The American Pageant website: www.cengage.com/history/kennedy/ampageant14e



The Harding Administration


 Harding, like Grant, was unable to detect moral halitosis in his evil associates, and he was soon surrounded by his poker-playing, shirt-sleeved cronies of the “Ohio Gang.” “A good guy,” Harding was “one of the boys.” He hated to hurt people’s feelings, especially those of his friends, by saying no, and designing political leeches capitalized on this weakness. The difference between George Washington and Warren Harding, ran a current quip, was that while Washington could not tell a lie, Harding could not tell a liar. He “was not a bad man,” said one Washington observer. “He was just a slob.” Candidate Harding, who admitted his scanty mental furnishings, had promised to gather about him the “best minds” of the party. Charles Evans Hughes— masterful, imperious, incisive, brilliant—brought to the position of secretary of state a dominating if somewhat conser vative leadership. The new secretary of the Treasury was a lean and elderly Pittsburgh aluminum king, Andrew W. Mellon, multimillionaire collector of the paintings that are now displayed in Washington as his gift to the nation. Chubby-faced Herbert Hoover, famed feeder of the Belgians and wartime food administrator, became secretary of commerce. An energetic businessman and engineer, he raised his second-rate cabinet post to ﬁ rst-rate importance, especially in drumming up foreign trade for U.S. manufacturers. But the “best minds” of the cabinet were largely offset by two of the worst. Senator Albert B. Fall of New Mexico, a scheming anticonservationist, was appointed secretary of the interior. As guardian of the nation’s natural resources, he resembled the wolf hired to protect the sheep. Harry M. Daugherty, a smalltown lawyer but a big-time crook in the “Ohio Gang,” was supposed to prosecute wrongdoers as attorney general.

GOP
Reaction at the Throttle Well-intentioned but weak-willed, Harding was a perfect “front” for enterprising industrialists. A McKinleystyle old order settled back into place with a heavy thud at war’s end, crushing the reform seedlings that had sprouted in the progressive era. A nest-feathering crowd moved into Washington and proceeded to hoodwink Harding, whom many regarded as an “amiable boob.” This new Old Guard hoped to improve on the old business doctrine of laissez-faire. Their plea was not simply for government to keep its hands off business, but for government to help guide business along the 


 path to proﬁts. They subtly and effectively achieved their ends by putting the courts and the administrative bureaus into the safekeeping of fellow stand-patters for the duration of the decade. The Supreme Court was a striking example of this trend. Harding lived less than three years as president, but he appointed four of the nine justices. Several of his choices were or became deep-dyed reactionaries, and they buttressed the dike against popular currents for nearly two decades. Harding’s fortunate choice for chief justice was ex-president Taft, who not only performed his duties ably but surprisingly was more liberal than some of his cautious associates. In the ﬁ rst years of the 1920s, the Supreme Court axed progressive legislation. It killed a federal childlabor law, stripped away many of labor’s hard-won gains, and rigidly restricted government intervention in the economy. In the landmark case of Adkins v. Children’s Hospital (1923), the Court reversed its own reasoning in Muller v. Oregon (see p. 711), which had declared women to be deserving of special protection in the workplace, and invalidated a minimum-wage law for women. Its strained ruling was that because women now had the vote (Nineteenth Amendment), they were the legal equals of men and could no longer be protected by special legislation. The contradictory premises of the Muller and Adkins cases framed a debate over gender differences that would continue for the rest of the century: were women sufﬁciently different from men that they merited special legal and social treatment, or were they effectively equal in the eyes of the law and therefore undeserving of special protections and preferences? (An analogous debate over racial differences haunted afﬁ rmative-action policies later in the century.) Corporations, under Harding, could once more relax and expand. Antitrust laws were often ignored, circumvented, or feebly enforced by friendly prosecutors in the attorney general’s ofﬁce. The Interstate

 Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes (1841–1935), wryly dissenting in the Adkins case, said,

“


 It would need more than the Nineteenth Amendment to convince me that there are no differences between men and women, or that legislation cannot take those differences into account.

”




