768 • CHAPTER 31


 Central to the economic problems was the continuing energy crisis. In the aftermath of the Arab oil embargo of 1973, the OPEC cartel raised the price of oil—by 400 percent in 1974 alone—one of the principal reasons why inflation reached 11 percent in 1976. Ford retained Henry Kissinger as secretary of state and generally continued the ­foreign policies of the Nixon years. Late in 1974, Ford met with Leonid Brezhnev at Vladivostok in Siberia and signed an arms control accord. Meanwhile, in the Middle East, Henry Kissinger helped produce a new accord by which Israel agreed to return large portions of the occupied Sinai to Egypt. The two nations pledged not to resolve future differences by force. As the 1976 presidential election approached, Ford’s policies were coming under increasing 1976 Election attack from both the right and the left. In the Republican primary campaign, Ford faced a powerful challenge from former California governor Ronald Reagan, leader of the party’s conservative wing, who spoke for many Americans on the right who opposed any agreements with communists. The president barely survived the assault to win his party’s nomination. The Democrats, in the meantime, were gradually uniting behind a new and until recently almost entirely unknown candidate: Jimmy Carter, a former governor of Georgia who appealed to the general unhappiness with Washington by offering honesty, piety, and an outsider’s skepticism of the federal government. Unhappiness with the economy and a general Economic Problems





































26 13 25














6 12
















Candidate (Party)
Jimmy Carter
(Democratic)
Gerald R. Ford
(Republican)
Ronald Reagan
(Independent Republican)
 Other candidates (McCarthy [Ind.], Libertarian)

Electoral Vote


Popular Vote (%)




40,828,587
(50.0)
39,147,613
(47.9)




—


—


1,575,459
(2.1)




 53.5% of electorate voting THE ELECTION OF 1976 Jimmy Carter, a former governor of Georgia, swept the South in the 1976 election and carried enough of the industrial states of the Northeast and Midwest to win a narrow victory over President Gerald R. Ford. His showing indicated the importance to the Democratic Party of having a candidate capable of attracting support in the South, which was becoming increasingly Republican by the 1970s. • What drove so many southerners into the Republican Party?

FROM “THE AGE OF LIMITS” TO THE AGE OF REAGAN
• 769 

 disenchantment with Ford enabled the Democrat to win a narrow victory. Carter received 50 percent of the popular vote to Ford’s 47.9 percent and 297 electoral votes to Ford’s 240.

The Trials of Jimmy Carter
 Like Ford, Jimmy Carter assumed the presidency at a moment when the nation faced problems of staggering complexity and difficulty. But Carter seemed at times to make his predicament worse by a style of leadership that many Americans considered self-righteous and inflexible. Carter devoted much of his time to the problems of energy and the economy. Entering office in the midst of a recession, he moved first to reduce unemployment by raising public spending and cutting federal taxes. Unemployment declined, but inflation soared—mostly because of the continuing, sharp increases in energy prices by OPEC. During Carter’s last two years in office, retail prices rose at over a 10 percent annual rate. Like Nixon and Ford before him, Carter responded with a combination of tight money and calls for voluntary restraint. Determined to stop inflation, he appointed conservative economists to head the Federal Reserve Board, which helped push interest rates to the highest levels in American history; at times, they exceeded 20 percent. In the summer of 1979, instability in the Middle East produced a second major fuel shortage in the United States. In the midst of the crisis, OPEC announced another major price increase. Faced with increasing pressure to act, Carter went to Camp David, the presidential retreat in the Maryland mountains. Ten days later, he emerged to deliver a remarkable television address. It included a series of proposals for resolving the energy crisis. But it was most notable for Carter’s bleak assessment of the national condition and his claim that there was a “crisis of confidence” that had struck “at the very heart and soul of our national will.” The address became known as the “malaise” speech (although Carter himself had never used that word), and it helped fuel charges that the president was trying to blame his own problems on the American people. Carter’s sudden firing of several members of his cabinet a few days later deepened his political dilemma.

Human Rights and National Interests
 Among Jimmy Carter’s most frequent campaign promises was a new American foreign policy based on the defense of “human rights.” Carter spoke out sharply about human rights violations in many countries (including, most prominently, the Soviet Union). But the administration also focused on more traditional concerns. Carter completed negotiations begun several years earlier on a pair of treaties to turn over control of the Panama Canal to the government of Panama. After an acrimonious debate, the Senate Panama Canal Treaties ratified the treaties by 68 to 32, only one vote more than the necessary two-thirds majority. Carter’s greatest success was in arranging a peace treaty between Egypt and Israel. Middle East negotiations had seemed hopelessly stalled until Egyptian president Anwar Sadat accepted an invitation in November 1977 from Prime Minister Menachem Begin to visit Israel. In Tel Aviv, he announced that Egypt was now willing to accept the state of Israel as a legitimate political entity. When talks between Israeli and Egyptian negotiators stalled, Carter invited Sadat and Begin to a summit conference at Camp David in September 1978 and persuaded them to remain there for two weeks. On September 17, Carter escorted the two leaders into the White House to announce an agreement on a “framework” for an Egyptian–Israeli peace treaty, known as the Camp David accords. On March 26, 1979, Begin and Sadat Camp David Accords returned together to the White House to sign a formal peace treaty between their two nations.

770 • CHAPTER 31


 Jimmy Carter experienced many frustrations during his presidency, but his successful efforts in 1978 to negotiate a peace treaty between Israel and Egypt were undoubtedly his finest hour. Egyptian President Anwar Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin join Carter here in the East Room of the White House in September 1978 to sign the accords. (© D.B. Owen/Black Star) SIGNING THE CAMP DAVID ACCORDS

 In the meantime, Carter continued trying to improve relations with China and the Soviet Union. He responded eagerly to the overtures of Deng Xiaoping, the new Chinese leader attempting to open his nation to the outside world. On December 15, 1978, Washington and Beijing announced the resumption of formal diplomatic relations. A few months later, Carter traveled to Vienna to meet with the aging and ailing Brezhnev to finish drafting the new Strategic Arms Limitations Treaty II (SALT II) arms control agreement, which set limits on the number of long-range missiles, bombers, and nuclear warheads on each side. Almost immediately, however, SALT II met with fierce conservative opposition in the United States Senate. The agreement was never ratified.

The Year of the Hostages
 Since the early 1950s, the United States had provided political support and, more recently, massive military assistance to the government of the shah of Iran, hoping to make his nation a bulwark against Soviet expansion in the Middle East. By 1979, however, the shah was in deep trouble with his own people. Many Iranians resented the repressive, authoritarian tactics through which the shah had maintained his autocratic rule. At the same time, Islamic clergy (and much of the fiercely religious populace) opposed his efforts to modernize and Westernize Iranian society. The combination of resentments fueled a powerful revolutionary movement, which forced the shah to flee the country in January 1979. By late 1979, power in Iran resided with a zealous religious leader, the Ayatollah Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini Ruhollah Khomeini, who was fiercely anti-Western and antiAmerican. In late October 1979, the deposed shah arrived in New York to be treated for cancer. Days later, on November 4, an armed crowd stormed the American embassy in

FROM “THE AGE OF LIMITS” TO THE AGE OF REAGAN
• 771 

 Tehran, seized the diplomats and military personnel inside, and demanded the return of the shah to Iran in exchange for their freedom. Fifty-three Americans remained hostages in the embassy for over a year. Only weeks after the hostage seizure, on December 27, 1979, Soviet troops invaded Afghanistan, the mountainous Islamic nation lying between the USSR and Iran. The Soviet Union had been a power in Afghanistan for years and the dominant force since April 1978; a rebellion by radical Islamic guerrilla groups threatened the new Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan Soviet-backed government. But while some observers claimed that the Soviet invasion was a Russian attempt to secure the status quo, Carter claimed it was a Russian “stepping stone to their possible control over much of the world’s oil supplies” and the “gravest threat to world peace since World War II.” Carter angrily imposed a series of economic sanctions on the Russians, canceled American participation in the 1980 summer Olympic Games in Moscow, and announced the withdrawal of SALT II from Senate consideration.

THE RISE OF THE NEW
CONSERVATIVE MOVEMENT
 The jarring social and economic changes in American life in the 1960s and 1970s disillusioned many liberals, caught the left off-guard and without effective responses, and provided the right with its most important opportunity in generations to recapture a dominant position of political authority in American life.

The Sunbelt and Its Politics
 One of the most widely discussed demographic phenomena of the 1970s was the rise of what became known as the Sunbelt—the states of the Southeast and the Southwest. By 1980, the population of the Sunbelt had risen to exceed that of the older industrial regions of the North and the East. It directly contributed to the explosive growth of the modern conservative movement. The strong populist traditions in the South and the West helped produce opposition to the growth of government and resentment of the proliferating regulations and restrictions of the liberal state. Many of those regulations and restrictions—environmental laws, landuse restrictions, and other laws—affected the West more than any other region. The so-called Sagebrush Rebellion, which emerged in parts of the West in the late 1970s, mobilized conservative opposition to burgeoning environmental Sagebrush Rebellion laws and restrictions on development. It also sought to portray the West as a victim of government control. Its members demanded that the very large amounts of land the federal government owned in western states be opened for development. Suburbanization also fueled the rise of the right. Not all suburbs bred conservative politics, of course; but the most militantly conservative communities in America—among them Orange County in Southern California—were mostly suburbs. The seemingly tranquil life of the suburb contributed to a conservative view of the world.

Religious Revivalism
 In the 1960s, traditional mainstream religion experienced a conspicuous decline. But in its place began a powerful religious revival. Some of the new religious enthusiasm found expression in the rise of various popular movements and unorthodox faiths: the Church

772 • CHAPTER 31




WASHINGTON
MONTANA


NORTH
DAKOTA


OREGON


WYOMING


UTAH


San
Diego
-/6


COLORADO


ARIZONA
Phoenix
-/9


NEW MEXICO


ME.
VT.
N.H.
Boston 10/-


WISCONSIN
MICHIGAN


NEW YORK


MASS.
R.I.
New
Cleveland PA.
CT.
York
7/Philadelphia
IOWA
N.J. 1/1
Chicago
NEBRASKA
3/5
DEL.
2/3
A
T L A N T IC
OHIO
MD.
Baltimore IND. OCEA N 6/ILLINOIS W. VA. Washington, D.C. St. Louis KANSAS VIRGINIA 9/8/KENTUCKY MISSOURI NORTH CAROLINA TENNESSEE SOUTH OKLAHOMA POPULATION CHANGE ARKANSAS CAROLINA 1970–1990 (By state) MISS. TEXAS 
PA CI FIC
OCEA N


1000 km


Detroit
5/7


NEVADA


CALIFORNIA




MINN.


SOUTH
DAKOTA


IDAHO


Los Angeles
4/2


500 mi




San Antonio
-/10


Dallas
-/8
Houston
-/4


ALABAMA


GEORGIA


 Gain of 50% or more 30–49.9% gain 15–29.9% gain

LOUISIANA


FLORIDA


 5–14.9% gain Loss–4.9% gain TEN MOST POPULOUS CITIES 1950–1990

ALASKA


G ul f of M e x i c o
HAWAII


 (1/-) 1950 (rank) (-/8) 1990 (rank)

GROWTH OF THE SUNBELT, 1970–1990
One of the most important demographic changes of the last decades of the twentieth century was the shift of population out of traditional population centers in the Northeast and Midwest and toward the states of the so-called Sunbelt—most notably the Southwest and the Pacific Coast. This map gives a dramatic illustration of the changing concentration of population between 1970 and 1990. The orange states are those that lost population, while the purple and blue states are those that made significant gains (30 percent or more). • What was the impact of this population shift on the politics of the 1980s? 
 of Scientology; the Unification Church of the Reverend Sun Myung Moon; even the tragic People’s Temple, whose members committed mass suicide in their jungle retreat in Guyana in 1978. But the most important impulse of the religious revival was the growth of evangelical Christianity. Evangelicals have in common a belief in personal conversion (being “born again” Surging Evangelicalism through direct communication with Jesus). Evangelical religion had been the dominant form of Christianity in America through much of its history. In its modern form, it became increasingly visible during the early 1950s, when evangelicals such as Billy Graham and Pentecostals such as Oral Roberts began to attract huge national (and international) followings for their energetic revivalism. By the late 1970s, evangelical Christians had become more visible and more politically assertive. More than 70 million Americans now described themselves as born-again Christians. Christian evangelicals owned newspapers, magazines, radio stations, and television networks. They operated their own schools and universities. Three modern presidents—Jimmy Carter, Bill Clinton, and George W. Bush—have identified themselves as evangelicals. Some evangelical Christians supported racial and economic justice and world peace of the type espoused by civil rights leaders like Rev. Martin Luther King. But many others had a different political focus. Alarmed by what they considered the spread of immorality and disorder in American life, they were concerned about the way a secular culture was intruding into their communities, schools, and families. Many evangelical men and women, for example, feared that the growth of feminism posed a threat to the traditional family, and

FROM “THE AGE OF LIMITS” TO THE AGE OF REAGAN
• 773 

 they resented the way in which government policies advanced the goals of the women’s movement. Particularly alarming to them were Supreme Court decisions eliminating all religious observance from schools and, later, the decision guaranteeing women the right to an abortion. By the late 1970s, the “Christian right” had become a powerful political force. Jerry Falwell, a fundamentalist minister in Virginia with a substantial television audience, launched a highly visible movement he called the Moral Majority. He founded Liberty University in Lynchburg, Virginia, to train men and women according to conservative Christian principles. The Pentecostal minister Pat Robertson began a political movement of his own and, in the 1990s, launched an organization known as the Christian Coalition Christian Coalition. These and other organizations of the Christian right opposed federal interference in local affairs; denounced abortion, divorce, feminism, and homosexuality; defended unrestricted free enterprise; and supported a strong American posture in the world. Some denied the scientific doctrine of evolution and instead urged the teaching in schools of the biblical story of the Creation or—beginning in the early twenty-first century—the idea of “intelligent design.” Their goal was a new era in which “Christian values” once again dominated American life. The role of religion in the growth of conservatism was not limited to evangelical Christians. In the 1970s, the Catholic Church began to make a strong case for tradition as well. The Church fought most aggressively against abortion, thus joining the evangelical right in one of the most controversial issues of the time. Not all Catholics were or are conservatives; many priests and parishioners took strong liberal positions. But in the political world, Catholics became strong allies of the right, joining evangelicals in fighting for many conservative issues. Mormons, too, began to emerge as an important element of the right. For many years, Mormons did not publicize their conservatism. But like Catholics, many Mormons began to take openly conservative stances in the 1970s on some of the controversial battles of the time. Some of these Mormons, wealthy and successful businesspeople, became conservative political politicians in various parts of the country. (In 2012, two wealthy Mormons—Mitt Romney and Jon Huntsman, both former governors—were candidates for the presidency.)

The Emergence of the New Right
 Religious issues were only a part—although an important part—of what became known as the New Right—a diverse but powerful movement that enjoyed rapid growth in the 1970s and early 1980s. It had begun to take shape after the 1964 election, in which Barry Goldwater had suffered his shattering defeat. Energetic organizers responded to that disaster by building a new and powerful set of right-wing institutions to help conservatives campaign more effectively in the future. Beginning in the 1970s, largely because of these organizational advances, conservatives found themselves almost always better funded and organized than their opponents. By the late 1970s, there were right-wing think tanks, consulting firms, lobbyists, foundations, and colleges and universities. Conservatives also succeeded in building mechanisms to raise money, mobilize activists, and project their ideas to a broad audience. Building from a list compiled by Richard Viguerie after the 1964 Goldwater campaign, the right built a direct-mail operation that ultimately reached millions of conservative voters. Evangelicals such as Pat Robertson used cable television to reach the conservative faithful. Conservative radio hosts such as Rush Limbaugh ­created shows that attracted a vast national audience.

774 • CHAPTER 31


 Another factor in the revival of the right was the emergence in the late 1960s and early 1970s of Ronald Reagan. Once a moderately successful actor, he had moved into politics in the early 1960s and in 1964 delivered a memorable television speech on behalf of Goldwater. After Goldwater’s defeat, Reagan worked quickly to seize the leadership of the conservative wing of the party. In 1966, with the support of a group of wealthy conservatives, he won the first of two terms as governor of California. The presidency of Gerald Ford also played an important role in the rise of conservatism. Ford, probably without realizing it, touched on some of the right’s rawest nerves. He appointed as vice president Nelson Rockefeller, the liberal Republican governor of New York and an heir to one of America’s great fortunes; many conservatives had been demonizing Rockefeller and his family for more than twenty years. Ford proposed an amnesty program for draft resisters, embraced the hated Nixon–Kissinger policies of détente, ­presided over the fall of Vietnam, and agreed to cede the Panama Canal to Panama. When Reagan challenged Ford in the 1976 Republican primaries, the president survived, barely, only by dumping Nelson Rockefeller from the ticket and replacing him with Kansas Senator Robert Dole, a steadfast conservative. He also agreed to a platform largely written by conservatives.

Ronald Reagan


The Tax Revolt
 At least equally important to the success of the New Right was a new and potent conservative issue: the tax revolt. It had its public beginnings in 1978, when Howard Jarvis, a conservative activist in California, launched the first successful major citizens’ tax revolt with Proposition 13, Proposition 13 a referendum question on the state ballot rolling back property tax rates. Because property taxes were the most important source of funding for schools, Proposition 13 began the slow deterioration of much of the great California education system. Similar antitax movements soon began in other states and eventually spread to national politics. In Proposition 13 and similar initiatives, members of the right succeeded in separating the issue of taxes from the issue of what taxes supported. Instead of attacking popular programs such as Social Security, they attacked taxes themselves and argued that much of the money government raised through taxes was wasted. Virtually no one liked to pay taxes, and as the economy grew weaker and the relative burden of paying taxes grew heavier, that resentment naturally rose.

The Campaign of 1980
 By the time of the crises in Iran and Afghanistan, Jimmy Carter was in desperate political trouble—his standing in popularity polls lower than that of any president in history. Senator Edward Kennedy, younger brother of John and Robert Kennedy, challenged him in the primaries. And while Carter managed to withstand the confrontation and win his party’s nomination, his campaign aroused little popular enthusiasm. The stage was set for sweeping political change. The Republican Party, in the meantime, rallied enthusiastically behind the man who, four years earlier, had nearly stolen the nomination from Gerald Ford. Ronald Reagan was a sharp critic of the excesses of the federal government. He linked his campaign to the spreading tax revolt by promising substantial tax cuts. He also championed a restoration of American “strength” and “pride” in the world. On election day 1980, the anniversary of the seizure of the hostages in Iran, Reagan swept to victory, winning 51 percent of the vote to 41 percent for Jimmy Carter and

FROM “THE AGE OF LIMITS” TO THE AGE OF REAGAN
• 775 







































































Candidate (Party)
Ronald Reagan
(Republican)
Jimmy Carter
(Democratic)
John B. Anderson
(Independent)
 Other candidates (Libertarian)

Electoral Vote
—
—


Popular Vote (%)
43,901,812
(50.7)
35,483,820
(41.0)
5,719,722
(6.6)
921,299
(1.1)


 52.6% of electorate voting THE ELECTION OF 1980 Although Ronald Reagan won only slightly more than half of the popular vote in the 1980 presidential election, his electoral majority was overwhelming—a reflection to a large degree of the deep unpopularity of President Jimmy Carter in 1980. • What had made Carter so unpopular?

 7 percent for John Anderson—a moderate Republican congressman from Illinois who had mounted an independent campaign. The Republican Party won control of the Senate for the first time since 1952; and although the Democrats retained a modest majority in the House, the lower chamber, too, seemed firmly in the hands of conservatives. On the day of Reagan’s inauguration, the American hostages in Iran were released after their 444-day ordeal. The government of Iran, desperate for funds to support its floundering war against neighboring Iraq, had ordered the hostages freed in return for a release of billions in Iranian assets that the Carter administration had frozen in American banks. Americans welcomed the hostages home with demonstrations of joy and patriotism seldom seen since the end of World War II. But while the celebration in 1945 had marked a great American triumph, the euphoria in 1981 marked something quite different—a troubled nation grasping for reassurance. Ronald Reagan set out to provide it.

THE “REAGAN REVOLUTION”
 Ronald Reagan assumed the presidency in January 1981, promising a revolution in government more fundamental than any since the New Deal of fifty years before. (See “Consider the Source: Excerpts from Reagan’s First Inaugural Address.”) While his eight years in office produced a significant shift in public policy, they brought nothing so

CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
RONALD REAGAN ON THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT
 In this excerpt from his first inaugural a­ ddress, on January 20, 1981, Ronald Reagan laid out his central vision for the role of government in society. Questioning the ability of government to solve society’s social and economic ills, Reagan argued that the key to the nation’s future lay in reducing the role of government in everyday life. The economic ills we suffer have come upon us over several decades. They will not go away in days, weeks, or months, but they will go away. They will go away because we as Americans have the capacity now, as we’ve had in the past, to do whatever needs to be done to preserve this last and greatest bastion of freedom. In this present crisis, government is not the solution to our problem; government is the problem. From time to time we’ve been tempted to believe that society has become too complex to be managed by self-rule, that government by an elite group is superior to government for, by, and of the people. Well, if no one among us is capable of governing himself, then who among us has the capacity to govern someone else? All of us together, in and out of government, must bear the burden. The solutions we seek must be equitable, with no one group singled out to pay a higher price. We hear much of special interest groups. Well, our concern must be for a special interest group that has been too long neglected. It knows no sectional boundaries or ethnic and racial divisions, and it crosses political party lines. It is made up of men and women who raise our food, patrol our streets, man our mines and factories, teach our children, keep our homes, and heal us when we’re sick— professionals, industrialists, shopkeepers, clerks, cabbies, and truck drivers. 776 •

 They are, in short, “We the people,” this breed called Americans. Well, this administration’s objective will be a healthy, vigorous, growing economy that provides equal opportunities for all Americans with no barriers born of bigotry or discrimination. Putting America back to work means putting all Americans back to work. Ending inflation means freeing all Americans from the terror of runaway living costs. All must share in the productive work of this “new beginning,” and all must share in the bounty of a ­revived economy. With the idealism and fair play which are the core of our system and our strength, we can have a strong and prosperous America, at peace with ­itself and the world. So, as we begin, let us take inventory. We are a nation that has a government— not the other way around. And this makes us special among the nations of the Earth. Our government has no power except that granted it by the people. It is time to check and reverse the growth of government, which shows signs of having grown beyond the consent of the governed. It is my intention to curb the size and influence of the Federal establishment and to demand recognition of the distinction between the powers granted to the Federal Government and those reserved to the States or to the people. All of us need to be reminded that the Federal Government did not create the States; the States created the Federal Government. Now, so there will be no misunderstanding, it’s not my intention to do away with government. It is rather to make it work— work with us, not over us; to stand by our side, not ride on our back. Government can and must provide opportunity, not smother it; foster productivity, not stifle it. If we look to the answer as to why for so many years we achieved so much, prospered

 as no other people on Earth, it was because here in this land we unleashed the energy and individual genius of man to a greater extent than has ever been done ­before. Freedom and the dignity of the individual have been more available and assured here than in any other place on Earth. The price for this freedom at times has been high, but we have never been unwilling to pay that price. It is no coincidence that our present troubles parallel and are proportionate to the intervention and intrusion in our lives that result from unnecessary and excessive growth of government. It is time for us to realize that we’re too great a nation to limit ourselves to small dreams. We’re not, as some would have us believe, doomed to an inevitable decline. I do not believe in a fate that will fall on us no ­matter what we do. I do believe in a fate

 that will fall on us if we do nothing. So, with all the creative energy at our command, let us begin an era of national ­renewal. Let us renew our determination, our courage, and our strength. And let us renew our faith and our hope. UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE 1. What does Reagan mean when he

 says, in the opening lines of the ­second paragraph, that “government is the problem”? 2. Why did Reagan’s call for a curb on the government’s role in society and the economy strike such a popular chord in the 1980s? 3. According to Reagan, who has been treated unfairly under the previous ­administration? Whom are the ­disadvantaged?

 Source: The Ronald Reagan Presidential Library, National Archives and Records Administration, www.reagan.utexas. edu/archives/speeches/1981/12081a.htm.

 fundamental as many of his supporters had hoped or his opponents had feared. But Reagan succeeded brilliantly in making his own engaging personality the central fact of American politics in the 1980s. He also benefited from the power of the diverse coalition that had united behind him.

The Reagan Coalition
 The Reagan coalition included a relatively small but highly influential group of wealthy Americans firmly committed to unfettered capitalism. They believed that the “market” offered the best solutions to most problems, and they shared a deep hostility to most (although not all) government interference in markets. Central to this group’s agenda in the 1980s was opposition to what it scorned as the “redistributive” economic politics of the government (especially its highly progressive tax ­structure) and hostility to the rise of what they believed were “antibusiness” government r­egulations. Reagan courted these free-market conservatives carefully and effectively, and in the end Free-Market Conservatives it was their interests his administration most ­effectively served. A second element of the Reagan coalition consisted of a small but influential group of intellectuals commonly known as “neoconservatives,” who gave to the Neoconservatives right something it had not had in many years—a firm base among “opinion leaders,” people with access to the most influential public forums of ideas. Many of these people had once been liberals and, before that, socialists. But during the turmoil of the 1960s, they had become alarmed by what they considered a dangerous and destructive radicalism. • 777

778 • CHAPTER 31


RONALD AND NANCY REAGAN
The president and the first lady greet guests at a White House social event. Nancy Reagan was committed to making the White House, and her husband’s presidency, seem more glamorous than those of most recent administrations. But she also played an important, if usually quiet, policy role in the administration. (Photo by Dirck Halstead/© Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images) 
 Neoconservatives were sympathetic to the complaints and demands of capitalists, but their principal concern was to reassert legitimate authority and reaffirm Western democratic, anticommunist values and commitments. They considered themselves soldiers in a battle to “win back the ­culture”—from the crass, radical ideas that had polluted it. Neoconservatives also strongly dissented from the new foreign policy orthodoxies of liberals and the left in the aftermath of the Vietnam War. They utterly rejected the idea that America should be a less interventionist nation, that it should work to ease tensions with the Soviet Union, and that it should tolerate radical regimes. Instead, they argued for an escalation of the Cold War as part of an effort to destabilize the Soviet Union. They insisted that the Vietnam War was an appropriate American commitment and that its abandonment was a terrible mistake. They believed that the United States had a special role to play in the world and should be willing to use military intervention to secure its vision. These ideas strongly influenced the foreign policy of the Reagan administration. The same ideas (and some of the same people) resurfaced in the early twenty-first century to help shape the international policies of the George W. Bush administration. These groups formed an uneasy alliance with the broad grassroots conservative movement, but collectively formed the New Right. It shared a fundamental distrust of the “eastern establishment”: a suspicion of its motives and goals and a sense that it exercised

FROM “THE AGE OF LIMITS” TO THE AGE OF REAGAN
• 779 

 a dangerous, secret power in American life. These populist conservatives expressed the kinds of concerns that outsiders—non-elites—have traditionally voiced in American ­society: an opposition to centralized power and influence and a fear of living in a world where distant, hostile forces are controlling society and threatening individual freedom and community autonomy. It was a testament to Ronald Reagan’s political skills and personal charm that he was able to generate enthusiastic support from these populist conservatives while at the same time appealing to more elite conservative groups whose concerns were in many ways antithetical to those of the New Right.

Reagan in the White House
 Even many people who disagreed with Reagan’s policies found themselves drawn to his attractive and carefully honed public image. He turned seventy years old a few weeks after taking office and was the oldest man ever to serve as president. But through most of his presidency, he appeared to be vigorous, resilient, even youthful. When wounded in an assassination attempt in 1981, he joked with doctors on his way into surgery and appeared to bounce back from the ordeal with remarkable speed. Even when things went wrong, as they often did, the blame seldom seemed to attach to Reagan himself (inspiring some Democrats to refer to him as the “Teflon president”). Reagan was not much involved in the day-to-day affairs of running the government; he surrounded himself with tough, energetic administrators who insulated him from many of the pressures of the office and who apparently relied on him largely for general guidance, not specific decisions. At times, the president revealed a startling ignorance about the nature of his own policies or the actions of his subordinates. But Reagan did make active use of his office to generate public support for his administration’s programs.

“Supply-Side” Economics
 Reagan’s 1980 campaign for the presidency had promised to restore the economy to health by a bold experiment that became known as “supply-side”—or, to its critics, “trickle-down”— economics. Eventually, it was called “Reaganomics.” Supply-side economics Reaganomics operated from the assumption that the woes of the American economy were in large part a result of excessive taxation, which left inadequate capital available to investors to stimulate growth. The solution, therefore, was to reduce taxes, with particularly generous benefits to corporations and wealthy individuals, in order to encourage new investments. In its first months in office, the new administration hastily assembled a legislative program based on the supply-side idea. It proposed $40 billion in budget reductions and managed to win congressional approval of almost all of them. In addition, the president proposed a bold three-year, 30 percent reduction on both individual and corporate Tax Cuts tax rates. In the summer of 1981, Congress passed it, too, after lowering the reductions to 25 percent. Reagan suceeded thanks to a disciplined Republican majority in the Senate and a Democratic majority in the House that was weak and riddled with defectors. Reagan appointees in the executive branch of government aimed to reduce the role of government in American economic life. Deregulation, an idea many Democrats had begun to embrace in the Carter years, became almost a religion in the Reagan administration. Secretary of the Interior James Watt, a major figure in the antienvironmental Sagebrush Rebellion, opened up public lands and water to development and led a charge to reverse older

780 • CHAPTER 31


 conservationist policies. The Environmental Protection Agency (before some of its directors were indicted for corruption) relaxed or entirely eliminated enforcement of major environmental laws and regulations. By early 1982, the nation had sunk into a severe recession. The Reagan economic program was not directly to blame for the problems, but neither did it offer a quick solution. During 1982, unemployment reached 11 percent, one of the highest levels since the 1930s. But before the recession could do great damage to Reagan, the economy recovered more rapidly and impressively than almost anyone had expected. By late 1983, unemployment had fallen to 8.2 percent, and it declined steadily for several years after that. The gross national product (GNP) grew 3.6 percent in a year, the largest increase since the mid-1970s. Inflation fell below 5 percent. The economy continued to grow, and both inflation and unemployment remained low through most of the decade. The recovery was a result of many things. Prior years of tight money policies by the Federal Reserve Board had helped lower inflation; perhaps equally important, the Fed had lowered interest rates early in 1983 in response to the recession. A worldwide “energy glut” and the virtual collapse of the OPEC cartel had produced at least a temporary end to the inflationary pressures of spiraling fuel costs. And staggering federal budget deficits were pumping billions of dollars into the flagging economy. As a result, consumer spending and business investment both increased. The stock market rose up from its doldrums of the 1970s and began a sustained and historic boom. In August 1982, the Dow Jones Industrial Average stood at 777. Five years later it had passed 2,000. Despite a frightening crash in the fall of 1987, the market continued to grow for more than another decade. The Dow Jones average passed 18,000 in 2015.

The Fiscal Crisis
 The economic revival did little at first to reduce the staggering, and to many Americans alarming, federal budget deficits (the gap between revenue and spending in a single year) or to slow the growth in the national debt (the debt the nation accumulates over time as a result of its annual deficits). By the mid-1980s, this growing fiscal crisis had become one of the central issues in American politics. Having entered office promising a balanced Record Budget Deficits budget within four years, Reagan presided over record budget deficits and accumulated more debt in his eight years in office than the American government had accumulated in its entire previous history. Before the 1980s, the highest single-year budget deficit in American history had been $66 billion (in 1976). Throughout the 1980s, the annual budget deficit consistently exceeded $100 billion (and in 1991 peaked at $268 billion). The national debt rose from $907 billion in 1980 to nearly $3.5 trillion by 1991. Much larger deficits—and debt—were soon to come. The enormous deficits had many causes. The budget suffered from enormous increases in the costs of “entitlement” programs (especially both Social Security and Medicare), a result of the aging of the population and dramatic increases in the cost of health care. The 1981 tax cuts, the largest in American history, also contributed to the deficit. The massive increase in military spending on which the Reagan administration insisted added much more to the federal budget than its cuts in domestic spending removed. In the face of these deficits, the administration proposed further cuts in “discretionary” domestic spending, which included many programs aimed at the poorest (and politically weakest) Americans. By the end of Reagan’s third year in office, funding for domestic programs had been cut nearly as far as Congress (and, apparently, the public) was willing to tolerate,

FROM “THE AGE OF LIMITS” TO THE AGE OF REAGAN
• 781 

 and still no end to the rising deficit was in sight. By the late 1980s, many fiscal conservatives were calling for a constitutional amendment mandating a balanced budget—a provision the president himself claimed to support. But Congress never approved the amendment.

Reagan and the World
 Relations with the Soviet Union, which had been steadily deteriorating in the last years of the Carter administration, grew still chillier in the first years of the Reagan presidency. The president spoke harshly of the Soviet regime (which he once called the “evil empire”), accusing it of sponsoring world terrorism and declaring that any armaments negotiations must be linked to negotiations on Soviet behavior in other areas. Although the president had long denounced the SALT II arms control treaty as unfavorable to the United States, he continued to honor its provisions. But the president proposed the most ambitious (and potentially most expensive) new military program in many years: the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), Strategic Defense Initiative widely known as “Star Wars” (after the popular movie of that name). Reagan claimed that SDI, through the use of lasers and satellites, could provide an effective shield against incoming missiles and thus make nuclear war obsolete. The Soviet Union claimed that the new program would elevate the arms race to new and more dangerous levels and insisted that any arms control agreement should begin with an American abandonment of SDI. The escalation of Cold War tensions and the slowing of arms control initiatives helped produce an important popular movement in Europe and the United States calling for a “nuclear freeze,” an agreement between the two superpowers not to expand their atomic arsenals. In what many believed was the largest mass demonstration in American history, nearly a million people rallied in New York City’s Central Park in 1982 to support the freeze. Perhaps partly in response to this growing pressure, the administration began tentative efforts to revive arms control negotiations in 1983. The administration created a new policy known as the Reagan Doctrine, designed to help resist communism and anti-Americanism in the Third World. Reagan Doctrine The United States sent soldiers and money to aid guerrillas and resistance movements in countries with anti-American governments—among them Grenada, El Salvador, and Nicaragua. But Reagan generally backed away from more serious warfare. In 1982, when the Israeli army invaded Lebanon, American peacekeeping forces entered Beirut to stabilize the nation. But when a terrorist bombing of a U.S. military barracks in Beirut led to the death of 241 marines, Reagan quickly withdrew the American forces. There were other terrorist events against America and other nations by attacking bombs, ships, and diplomatic buildings—the beginning of what would become a long battle against terrorism. Reagan approached the campaign of 1984 at the head of a united Republican Party firmly committed to his candidacy. The Democrats nominated former vice president Walter Mondale. Mondale brought momentary excitement to the Democratic campaign by selecting a woman, Representative Geraldine Ferraro of New York, to be his running mate and the first female candidate ever to appear on a national ticket. But Reagan’s ­triumphant campaign scarcely took note of his opponents and spoke instead of what he claimed was the remarkable revival of American fortunes and spirits under his leadership, Reagan Reelected or what he sometimes called “Morning in America.” He won 59 percent of the vote and carried every state but Mondale’s native Minnesota and the District of Columbia.

782 • CHAPTER 31


AMERICA AND THE WANING
OF THE COLD WAR
 Many factors contributed to the collapse of the Soviet Empire. The long, stalemated war in Afghanistan proved at least as disastrous to the Soviet Union as the Vietnam War had been to America. The government in Moscow failed to address a long-term economic decline in the Soviet republics and the Eastern-bloc nations. Restiveness with the heavyhanded policies of communist police states was growing throughout much of the Soviet Mikhail Gorbachev Empire. But the most visible factor at the time was the emergence of Mikhail Gorbachev, who succeeded to the leadership of the Soviet Union in 1985 and, to the surprise of almost everyone (probably including himself), very quickly became the most revolutionary figure in world politics in decades.

The Fall of the Soviet Union
 Gorbachev transformed Soviet politics with two dramatic new initiatives: glasnost (openness), the dismantling of many of the repressive mechanisms that had been conspicuous Glasnost and Perestroika features of Soviet life for over half a century, and perestroika (reform), an effort to restructure the rigid and unproductive Soviet economy by introducing, among other things, such elements of capitalism as private ownership and the profit motive. He also began to transform Soviet foreign policy. The severe economic problems at home evidently convinced Gorbachev that the Soviet Union could no longer sustain its extended commitments around the world. As early as

THE FALL OF THE BERLIN WALL
The Berlin Wall is widely considered to have “fallen” on November 9, 1989. Starting on that date and in the days and weeks that followed, people used sledgehammers and picks to tear down the wall, often keeping the broken pieces as souvenirs of this symbolic conclusion of the Cold War. (© DIZ München GmbH/Alamy) 
FROM “THE AGE OF LIMITS” TO THE AGE OF REAGAN
• 783 

 1987, he began reducing the Soviet presence in Eastern Europe. And in 1989, in the space of a few months, every communist state in Europe—Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Romania, East Germany, Yugoslavia, and Albania—either overthrew its government or forced it to transform itself into an essentially noncommunist (and in some cases, actively anticommunist) regime. Perhaps the most dramatic event of this extraordinary revolution was the tearing down of the infamous Berlin Wall. Not all international protests against communism were so successful. In May 1989, students in China launched a mass movement calling for greater democratization. But in June, hard-line leaders seized control of the government and sent military forces to crush the uprising. The result was a bloody massacre on June 3, 1989, in Tiananmen Square in Beijing, in which an unknown number of demonstrators died. The assault Tiananmen Square crushed the democracy movement and restored hard-liners to power. It did not, however, stop China’s efforts to modernize and even Westernize its economy. But China was an exception to the widespread movement toward democratization. Early in 1990, the government of South Africa, long an international pariah for its rigid enforcement of “apartheid” (a system designed to protect white supremacy, much like the Jim Crow system had done in the American South) legalized the chief black party in the nation, the African National Congress (ANC), which had been banned for decades. The government also released from prison the leader of the ANC, Nelson Mandela, who had been in jail for twenty-seven years. Over the next several years, the South African government repealed its apartheid laws. And in 1994, there were national elections in which all South Africans could participate. As a result, Nelson Mandela became the first black president of South Africa. In 1991, communism began to collapse in the Soviet Union itself. An unsuccessful coup by hard-line Soviet leaders on August 19 precipitated a dramatic unraveling of communist power. Within days, the coup itself collapsed in the face of resistance from the Collapse of the USSR public and crucial elements within the military. By the end of August, many of the republics of the Soviet Union had declared independence; the Soviet government was clearly powerless to stop the fragmentation. Gorbachev himself finally resigned as leader of the now virtually powerless Communist Party and Soviet government, and the Soviet Union ceased to exist. The last years of the Reagan administration coincided with the first years of the Gorbachev regime; and while Reagan was skeptical of Gorbachev at first, he gradually became convinced that the Soviet leader was sincere in his desire for reform. In 1988, the two superpowers signed a treaty eliminating American and Soviet intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF) from Europe—the most significant arms control agreement of the nuclear age. At about the same time, Gorbachev ended the Soviet Union’s long and frustrating military involvement in Afghanistan.

The Fading of the Reagan Revolution
 For a time, the dramatic changes around the world and Reagan’s personal popularity deflected attention from a series of scandals that might well have destroyed another administration, including revelations of illegal and ethical lapses in the Environmental Protection Agency, the CIA, the Department of Defense, the Department of Labor, the Department of Justice, and the Department of Housing and Urban Development. A more serious scandal emerged within the savings and loan industry, which the Reagan administration had helped deregulate in the early 1980s. By the end of the decade, the industry was in chaos, and the government was forced to step in to prevent a complete collapse. The cost of the debacle to the public eventually ran to more than half a trillion dollars.

784 • CHAPTER 31


 But the most politically damaging scandal of the Reagan years came to light in November 1986, when the White House conceded that it had sold weapons to the revolutionary government of Iran as part of a largely unsuccessful effort to secure the release of several Americans being held hostage. Even more damaging was the revelation that some of the money from the arms deal with Iran had been covertly and illegally funneled into a fund to aid the contras, a loose group of commandos who fought against the anti-American government after the 1979 revolution in Nicaragua. In the months that followed, aggressive reporting and a series of congressional hearings exposed a widespread pattern of covert activities orchestrated by the White House and dedicated to advancing the administration’s foreign policy aims through secret and at times illegal means. The Iran-contra scandal, as it became known, did serious damage to the Reagan presidency—even though the investigations never tied the president himself to the most serious violations of the law.

Iran-Contra Scandal


The Presidency of George H. W. Bush
 The fraying of the Reagan administration helped the Democrats regain control of the United States Senate in 1986 and fueled hopes in the party for a presidential victory in 1988. Michael Dukakis, a three-term governor of Massachusetts, eventually captured the nomination. Vice President George H. W. Bush was the largely unopposed Republican candidate. Neither candidate succeeded in creating public enthusiasm.































24 12 23














6 12
















Candidate (Party)
George H. W. Bush
(Republican)
Michael Dukakis
(Democratic)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote (%)




47,946,422
(54.0)
41,016,429
(46.0)




 50% of electorate voting THE ELECTION OF 1988 Democrats had high hopes going into the election of 1988, but Vice President George H. W. Bush won a decisive victory over Michael Dukakis, who did only slightly better than Walter Mondale had done four years earlier. • What made it so difficult for a Democrat to challenge the Republicans in 1988 after eight years of a Republican administration?

FROM “THE AGE OF LIMITS” TO THE AGE OF REAGAN
• 785 

 Beginning at the Republican National Convention, Bush made his campaign a long, relentless attack on Dukakis, tying him to all the unpopular social and cultural stances Americans had come to identify with “liberals.” Bush won a substantial victory in November: 54 percent of the popular vote to Dukakis’s 46 percent, and 426 electoral votes to Dukakis’s 112. But Bush carried few Republicans into office with him; the Democrats retained secure majorities in both houses of Congress. The broad popularity Bush enjoyed during much of his first three years in office was partly a result of his subdued, unthreatening public image. But it was primarily due to the wonder and excitement with which Americans viewed the dramatic events in the rest of the world. Bush moved cautiously at first in dealing with the changes in the Soviet Union. But like Reagan, he eventually cooperated with Gorbachev and reached a series of significant arms control agreements with the Soviet Union in its waning years. On domestic issues, the Bush administration was less successful. His administration inherited a staggering burden of debt and a federal deficit that had been growing dramatically for nearly a decade. Constantly concerned about the right wing of his own party, Bush aggressively opposed current laws governing abortion and affirmative action that damaged his ability to work with the Democratic Congress. Despite this political stalemate, Congress and the White House managed on occasion to agree on significant measures. In 1990, the president agreed to a significant tax increase as part of a multiyear “budget package” designed to reduce the deficit—thus violating his own 1988 campaign pledge of “no new taxes.” But the most serious domestic problem facing the Bush administration was one for which neither the president nor Congress had any answer: a recession that began late in 1990 and became more serious in 1991 and 1992.

The Gulf War
 The fall of the Soviet Union left the United States in the unanticipated position of being the only real superpower in the world. It forced the Bush administration to consider what to do with America’s formidable political and military power. The events of 1989–1991 suggested two possible answers. One was that the United States would reduce its military strength dramatically and concentrate its energies and resources on pressing domestic problems. The other was that America would continue to use its power actively, not to fight communism but to defend its regional and economic interests. The answer came quickly. In 1989, the administration ordered an invasion of Panama, which overthrew the unpopular military leader Manuel Noriega (under indictment in the United States for drug trafficking) and replaced him with an elected, pro-American regime. And in 1990, that same impulse drew the United States into the turbulent politics of the Middle East. On August 2, 1990, the armed forces of Iraq invaded and quickly overwhelmed the emirate of Kuwait, the small oil-rich neighbor of Iraq. Saddam Hussein, Saddam Hussein the militaristic leader of Iraq, soon announced that he was annexing Kuwait. The Bush administration soon agreed to lead other nations in a campaign to force Iraq out of Kuwait—through the pressure of economic sanctions if possible, through military force if necessary. Within a few weeks, Bush had persuaded virtually every important government in the world, including the Soviet Union and almost all the Arab and Islamic states, to join in a United Nations–sanctioned trade embargo of Iraq.

786 • CHAPTER 31


 At the same time, the United States and its allies (including the British, French, Egyptians, and Saudis) began deploying a large military force along the border between Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, a force that ultimately reached 690,000 troops (425,000 of them American). And on January 16, American and allied air forces began a massive bombardment of Iraqi troops in Kuwait and of military and industrial installations in Iraq itself. The allied bombing continued for six weeks. On February 23, allied (primarily American) forces under the command of General Norman Schwarzkopf began a major ground offensive to the north of the Iraqi forces. The allied armies encountered almost no resistance and suffered only light casualties (141 fatalities). Estimates of Iraqi deaths in the war were 100,000 or more. On February 28, Iraq announced its acceptance of allied terms for a cease-fire, and the brief Persian Gulf War was over.

The Election of 1992
 President Bush’s popularity reached a record high in the immediate aftermath of the Gulf War. But the glow of that victory faded quickly as the recession worsened in late 1991. That gave Bill Clinton, the young five-term Democratic governor of Arkansas, an opportunity to emerge as the early front-runner. Clinton survived a bruising primary campaign and a series of damaging personal controversies to win his party’s nomination.







































































Candidate (Party)


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote (%)




44,909,889
(43.0)
39,104,545
(37.5)
19,742,267
(18.9)


Bill Clinton
(Democratic)
George Bush
(Republican)
Ross Perot
(Independent)




 Other candidates

—




669,958
(0.6)


 55.2% of electorate voting THE ELECTION OF 1992 In the 1992 election, for the first time since 1976, a Democrat captured the White House. And although the third-party candidacy of Ross Perot deprived Bill Clinton of an absolute majority, he nevertheless defeated George Bush by a decisive margin in both the popular and electoral votes. • What factors had eroded President Bush’s once-broad popularity by 1992? What explained the strong showing of Ross Perot?

FROM “THE AGE OF LIMITS” TO THE AGE OF REAGAN
• 787 

 Complicating the campaign was the emergence of Ross Perot, a blunt, forthright Texas billionaire who became an independent candidate by tapping popular resentment of the federal bureaucracy and by promising tough, uncompromising leadership to deal with the fiscal crisis. At several moments in the spring, Perot led both Bush and Clinton in public opinion polls. But in July, as he began to face hostile scrutiny from the media, he abruptly withdrew from the race. Early in October, he reentered and soon regained much (although never all) of his early support. After a campaign in which the economy was the principal issue, Clinton won a clear, but hardly overwhelming, victory over Bush and Perot. He received 43 percent Clinton Elected of the vote in the three-way race, to the president’s 38 percent and Perot’s 19 percent (the best showing for a third-party or independent candidate since Theodore Roosevelt in 1912). Clinton won 370 electoral votes to Bush’s 168; Perot won none. Democrats also retained control of both houses of Congress.

CONCLUSION
 America in the late 1970s was, by the standards of its own recent history, an unusually troubled nation—numbed by the Watergate scandals, the fall of Vietnam, and perhaps most of all the nation’s increasing economic difficulties. The unhappy presidencies of Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter provided little relief from these accumulating problems and anxieties. Indeed, in the last year of the Carter presidency, the nation’s future seemed particularly bleak in light of severe economic problems, a traumatic seizure of American hostages in Iran, and a Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. In the midst of these problems, American conservatives slowly and steadily prepared for a political revolution. A coalition of disparate but impassioned groups on the right— including a large movement known as the “New Right,” with vaguely populist impulses— gained strength from the nation’s troubles and from their own success in winning support for a broad-ranging revolt against taxes. Their efforts culminated in the election of 1980, when Ronald Reagan became the most conservative man in at least sixty years to be elected president of the United States. Reagan’s first term was a dramatic contrast to the troubled presidencies that had preceded it and signaled a reversal or at least a modification of ruling economic and social policies. He won substantial victories in Congress (cutting taxes, reducing spending on domestic programs, building up the military). Perhaps equally important, he made his own engaging personality one of the central political forces in national life. Easily reelected in 1984, he seemed to have solidified the conservative grip on national political life. In his second term, however, a series of scandals and misadventures—and the president’s own declining energy—limited the administration’s effectiveness. Nevertheless, Reagan’s personal popularity remained high, and the economy continued to prosper—factors that propelled his vice president, George H. W. Bush, to succeed him in 1989. Bush’s presidency was not as successful as Reagan’s had been, and the perception of his disengagement with the nation’s growing economic problems contributed to Bush’s defeat in 1992. But a colossal historic event overshadowed most domestic concerns during Bush’s term in office: the collapse of the Soviet Union and the fall of communist regimes all over Europe. The United States was to some degree a dazzled observer of this process. But the end of the Cold War also propelled the United States into the possession of unchallenged

788 • CHAPTER 31


 global preeminence—and drew it increasingly into the role of international arbiter and peacemaker. The Gulf War of 1991 was the most dramatic example of the new global role the United States would now increasingly assume as the world’s only true superpower.

KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
Ayatollah Ruhollah
Khomeini 770
Bill Clinton 786
 Camp David accords 769 Christian Coalition 773 deregulation 779 George H. W. Bush 784 Gerald Ford 774 glasnost 782

 Iran-contra scandal 784 Jimmy Carter 768 Mikhail Gorbachev 782 neoconservatives 777 New Right 773 perestroika 782 Reagan Doctrine 781 Reaganomics 779 Ronald Reagan 774

Saddam Hussein 785
Sagebrush Rebellion 771
 stagflation 767 Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) 781 Sunbelt 771 Tiananmen Square 783

RECALL AND REFLECT
 1. Did the Ford and Carter presidencies fail to repair the damage done to the reputation of the

 presidency by the Watergate scandal and Nixon’s resignation? If so, why? 2. Why did the American electorate become increasingly conservative during the 1970s and

 1980s? What are some examples that testify to this increasing conservatism? 3. What philosophy guided foreign policy under Reagan? How did the rise of Mikhail Gorbachev

 alter Reagan’s foreign policy toward the Soviet Union?



THE AGE OF
GLOBALIZATION
A RESURGENCE OF PARTISANSHIP
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY IN THE NEW
ECONOMY
A CHANGING SOCIETY
AMERICA IN THE WORLD


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. How did increasing partisanship affect governing during the late 1900s and early 2000s? How does it continue to affect the relationship between the president and Congress? 2. How did the growth of the “new economy” affect how Americans worked and lived? 3. How was the American population changing at the turn of the century? What characterizes it, and what key challenges does it confront? 4. How did the terrorist attack of September 11, 2001, affect the United States and begin a new era in American foreign policy?

ON AN EARLY TUESDAY
morning in 2001, a commercial airliner crashed into the side of one of two tallest buildings in New York, the North Tower of the World Trade Center. Within thirty minutes, another commercial airliner struck the South Tower. Before the steel girders in both towers buckled and collapsed from the tremendous heat of the burning wreckage, Americans learned of even more disasters. A plane flew into the Pentagon in Washington, D.C., and another crashed a few hundred miles away in a field not far from Pittsburgh, after passengers apparently seized the cockpit and prevented the hijackers from reaching their unknown target. In these four, almost simultaneous, catastrophes, nearly 3,000 people died. The events of September 11 and their aftermath sparked significant changes in American life. And yet there was at least one great continuity between the world of the 1990s and the world that seemed to begin on September 11, 2001. The United States in the last years of the twentieth century and the first years of the twenty-first, more than at any other time in its history, was becoming more and more deeply entwined in a new age of globalism—an age that combined great promise with great peril. • 789 
A RESURGENCE OF
PARTISANSHIP


TIME LINE
 Bill Clinton elected Government shutdown

 NAFTA ratified Welfare reform passed



Defense of Marriage Act


 Balanced budget agreement

 Clinton reelected Lewinsky scandal breaks

 Clinton acquitted by Senate



 Clinton impeached by House George W. Bush wins contested election

 9/11 attacks U.S. defeats Taliban regime in Afghanistan

 U.S. invades Iraq

 Abu Ghraib scandal Bush reelected “Tea Party” fields candidates

Hurricane Katrina




 Troop “surge” in Iraq

The Great Recession


 Mortgage crisis

 Obama elected nation’s first African American president

Affordable Care Act
 signed Deepwater Horizon (BP) oil spill

 Osama bin Laden killed by U.S. Special Forces Occupy Wall Street

 Obama reelected Sandy Hook school shooting Obergefell v. Hodges

790 •


 Border bill passes Senate, fails in the House

 When Bill Clinton took the presidential oath of office in January 1993, little did he or any other American realize that partisan politics would become a crippling problem. Beginning with Clinton and continuing through the administration of President Barack Obama, Democrats and Republicans regularly chose ideological purity over political compromise, effectively gumming up the machinery of the federal government and nearly bringing it to the brink of shutting down on more than one occasion. At times the political divides occurred within a party: conservative Republicans refusing the hand of negotiation to their more liberal brethren on matters of higher taxes, raising the national debt ceiling, or supporting national health insurance. Like few periods in American history, the turn of the twentyfirst century showcased bitter splits between the parties that fundamentally affected how the White House and Congress functioned.

Launching the Clinton
Presidency
 Bill Clinton entered office as the first Democratic president since Jimmy Carter and the first self-proclaimed “activist” president, meaning a president seeking to expand the active role of the federal government in solving social problems, since Lyndon Johnson. Indeed, his domestic agenda was more ambitious than that of any president since the 1960s. But Clinton also had significant political weaknesses. Having won the vote of well under half the electorate, he had no powerful mandate for change. The new administration began with a series of missteps and misfortunes in its first months. The president’s effort to end the longtime ban on gay men and lesbians serving in the military met with ferocious resistance, and he was forced to settle for a

THE AGE OF GLOBALIZATION
• 791 

 compromise known as “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell,” which forbade recruiters to ask recruits about their sexual preferences but also forbade servicemen and servicewomen to reveal them. Several of his early appointments became so controversial he had to withdraw them. Then Vince Foster, a longtime friend of the president who served as a deputy White House counsel and previous legal partner of First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton, committed suicide in the summer of 1993. His death sparked an escalating inquiry into some banking and real estate ventures involving the Clintons in the early 1980s, which became known as the Whitewater affair. An independent counsel began examining these issues in 1993. (The Clintons were ultimately cleared of wrongdoing in Whitewater in 2000.) Despite its many problems, the Clinton administration had some important achievements in its first year. The president narrowly won approval of a budget that marked a significant turn away from some of the policies of the Reagan–Bush years, especially the focus on reducing personal and corporate taxes. It included a substantial tax increase on the wealthiest Americans, a sizable reduction in many areas of government spending, and a major expansion of tax credits to low-income working people. Clinton was a committed advocate of free trade. After a long and difficult battle against, among others, Ross Perot, the AFL-CIO, and many Democrats in Congress, he secured passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which eliminated Free-Trade Agreements most trade barriers among the United States, Canada, and Mexico. Later he won approval to sign a global accord that created the World Trade Organization (WTO), an international organization charged with negotiating agreements and settling disputes among its members. The president’s most notable and ambitious initiative was a major reform of the nation’s health-care system. Early in 1993, he appointed a task force, chaired by the first lady. The presidential task force proposed a sweeping reform designed to guarantee coverage to every American and hold down the costs of medical care. But there was substantial opposition from those who believed the reform would transfer too much power to the government. Well-funded opposition doomed the plan. The foreign policy of the Clinton administration was at first cautious and tentative. Yugoslavia, a nation created after World War I out of a group of small Balkan countries, dissolved again into several different countries in the wake of the 1989 collapse of its communist government. Bosnia was among the new nations, and it quickly became embroiled in a bloody civil war between its two major ethnic groups: one Muslim, the other Serbian and Christian, backed by the neighboring Serbian republic. All efforts by the other European nations and the United States to negotiate an end to the struggle failed until 1995, when the American negotiator Richard Holbrooke finally brought the warring parties together and crafted an agreement to partition Bosnia.

The Republican Resurgence
 The trials of the Clinton administration, and the failure of health-care reform in particular, proved damaging to the Democratic Party as it faced the congressional elections of 1994. For the first time in over forty years, Republicans gained control of both houses of Congress. Throughout 1995, the Republican Congress, under the aggressive leadership of House Speaker Newt Gingrich, worked at a sometimes feverish pace to construct Newt Gingrich what they called a “Contract with America,” an ambitious and even radical legislative program. The Republicans proposed a series of measures to transfer important powers from the federal government to the states; pushed for dramatic reductions in federal spending, including a major restructuring of the Medicare program, to reduce costs; and attempted to scale back a wide range of federal regulatory functions.

