406 • CHAPTER 17


 whole cities. By the turn of the century, electric power was becoming commonplace in street railway systems, in the elevators of urban skyscrapers, in factories, and increasingly in offices and homes. Particularly important to trade and industry was the development of new high-­efficiency steam engines capable of powering larger ships at faster speeds than ever before. The new high-speed freighters, for example, made it cheaper for Britain to buy wheat grown in Canada and the United States than to grow it at home. The introduction of refrigerated ships in the 1870s made it possible to transport meat from North America, and even Australia and Asia, to Europe.

The Technology of Iron and Steel Production
 Iron production had developed slowly in the United States through most of the nineteenth century, mostly driven by the demand for iron rails; steel production had developed hardly at all by the end of the Civil War. In the 1870s and 1880s, however, iron production soared as railroads added 40,000 new miles of track, and steel production made great strides toward its eventual dominance in the metals industry. An Englishman, Henry Bessemer, and an American, William Kelly, developed, almost simultaneously, a process for converting iron into the much more durable and versatile steel. (The process, which took Bessemer’s name, consisted of blowing air through molten iron to burn out the impurities and create a much stronger metal.) The Bessemer process also relied on the discovery by the British metallurgist Robert Mushet that ingredients could be added during the conversion process to give steel additional strength. In 1868, the New Jersey ironmaster Abram S. Hewitt introduced from Europe another method of making steel—the open-hearth process. These techniques made possible the production of steel in great quantities and large dimensions, for use in the manufacture of locomotives, rails, and girders for the construction of tall buildings. The steel industry emerged first in western Pennsylvania and eastern Ohio, partly because iron ore could be found there in abundance. It was also because the new forms of steel production created a demand for new kinds of fuel—and particularly for the anthracite (or hard) coal that was plentiful in Pennsylvania. Later, new techniques made it possible to use bituminous (or soft) coal, also easily mined in western Pennsylvania. As a result, Pittsburgh quickly became the center of the steel world. But the industry was growing fast and new sources of ore soon emerged. The upper peninsula of Michigan, the Mesabi Range in Minnesota, and the area around Birmingham, Alabama, became important ore-producing locales and new centers of steel production grew up near them: Cleveland, Detroit, Chicago, and Birmingham, among others. Until the Civil War, iron and steel furnaces were mostly made of stone and usually built against the side of a hill to reduce construction demands. By the 1870s, however, furnaces were redesigned as cylindrical iron shells lined with brick. These massive new furnaces were 75 feet tall and higher and could produce over 500 tons a week. As the steel industry spread, new transportation systems emerged to serve it. Steel production in the Great Lakes region produced steam freighters that could carry ore on the lakes. Shippers used new steam engines to speed the unloading of ore. The demand for vessels capable of transporting oil and the development of new and more powerful steam engines led to the design of larger and heavier freighters. There was an even closer relationship between the emerging steel companies and the railroads. Steel manufacturers provided rails and parts for cars; railroads were both m ­ arkets

INDUSTRIAL SUPREMACY
• 407 

 The American oil industry emerged first in western Pennsylvania, where speculators built makeshift facilities almost overnight. An oil field on the other side of the hill depicted here had been producing 600 barrels a day, and the wells quickly spilled over the hill and down the slope shown in the photograph. (The Library of Congress) PIONEER OIL RUN, 1865

 for and transporters of manufactured steel. But the relationship soon became more intimate than that. The Pennsylvania Railroad, for example, actually created the Steel and Railroads Pennsylvania Steel Company. The steel industry’s need for lubrication for its machines helped create another important new industry in the late nineteenth century—oil. (Not until later did oil become important primarily for its potential as a fuel.) The existence of petroleum reserves in western Pennsylvania had been common knowledge for some time. The Pennsylvania businessman George Bissell showed that the substance could be burned in lamps and that it could also yield such products as paraffin, naphtha, and lubricating oil. Bissell raised money to begin drilling; and in 1859, Edwin L. Drake, one of Bissell’s employees, established the first oil well near Titusville, Pennsylvania, which soon produced 500 barrels of oil a month. Demand for petroleum grew quickly, and promoters soon developed other oil fields in Pennsylvania, Ohio, and West Virginia.

The Automobile and the Airplane
 Among the most important technological innovations was the invention of the automobile. Two technologies led to its development. First was the creation of gasoline (or petrol), the product of an extraction process developed in the late nineteenth century in the United States by which lubricating oil and fuel oil were removed separately from crude oil. The second technology was the development of a self-contained engine. As early as the 1870s, designers in France, Germany, and Austria had begun to develop an “internal combustion engine,” which used the expanding power of burning gas to drive pistons. A German, Nicolaus August Otto, created a gas-powered “four-stroke” engine in the mid-1860s, which was a precursor to automobile engines. But he did not develop a way to untether

408 • CHAPTER 17


 it from gas lines to be used portably in machines. One of Otto’s former employees, Gottfried Daimler, later perfected an engine that could be used in automobiles. The American automobile industry developed rapidly in the aftermath of these European breakthroughs. Charles and Frank Duryea built the first gasoline-driven motor vehicle in Henry Ford America in 1893. Three years later, Henry Ford produced the first of the famous cars that would bear his name. In 1895, there were only four automobiles on the American highways. By 1917, there were nearly 5 million. The search for a means of human flight, as old as civilization, had been almost entirely futile until the late nineteenth century, when engineers, scientists, and tinkerers in both the United States and Europe began to experiment with a wide range of aeronautic devices. Balloonists began to consider ways to make dirigibles useful vehicles of transportation. Others experimented with kites and gliders. Two brothers in Ohio, Wilbur and Orville Wright, began to construct a glider in 1899 The Wright Brothers that could be propelled through the air by an internal combustion engine. Four years later, Orville made a celebrated test flight near Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, in which an airplane took off by itself and traveled 120 feet in 12 seconds under its own power before settling back to earth. By the fall of 1904, the Wright brothers had improved the plane to the point where they were able to fly over 23 miles, and in the following year they began to take a few passengers on their flights with them. Although the first working airplane was built in the United States, aviation technology was slow to gain a foothold in America. Most of the early progress in airplane design occurred in France, where there was substantial government funding for research and development. The U.S. government created the National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics in 1915, twelve years after the Wright brothers’ flight, and American airplanes became a significant presence in Europe during World War I. But the prospects for commercial flight seemed dim until the 1920s, when Charles Lindbergh’s famous solo flight from New York to Paris electrified the nation and the world.

Research and Development
 New industrial technologies persuaded many businesses to build their own research operations. The corporate research-and-development (R&D) laboratories coincided with a decline in government support for research, helping corporations attract skilled researchers. It also decentralized the sources of research funding and ensured that inquiry would move in many directions, and not just along paths determined by the government. A rift began to emerge between scientists and engineers. Engineers—both inside and outside of universities—became increasingly tied up with the R&D agendas of corporations. Many scientists continued to scorn this “commercialization” of knowledge and preferred to stick to basic research that had no immediate practical applications. But many American scientists were more closely connected to practical challenges than were their European counterparts, and some joined engineers in corporate R&D laboratories, which over time began to sponsor both practical and basic research.

The Science of Production
 Central to the growth of the automobile and other industries were changes in the techniques of production. By the turn of the century, many industrialists were embracing the

INDUSTRIAL SUPREMACY
• 409 

 This photograph, from 1902, shows women at work on the lock and drill department assembly line at the National Cash Register Company in Dayton, Ohio. (© Everett Collection Historical/Alamy) WOMEN ON THE ASSEMBLY LINE

 new principles of “scientific management,” often known as “Taylorism” after “Taylorism” its leading theoretician, Frederick Winslow Taylor. Taylor and his many admirers argued that scientific management made human labor compatible with the demands of the machine age. He persuaded employers to take control of the workplace. Taylor also urged employers to reorganize the production process by subdividing tasks. This sped up production and made workers more interchangeable, thus diminishing a manager’s dependence on any particular employee. If properly managed by trained experts, he claimed, workers using modern machines could perform simple tasks at much greater speed, greatly ­increasing productive efficiency. The most important change in industrial technology was the emergence of mass production and, along with it, the moving assembly line, which Henry Ford Assembly Line introduced in his automobile plants in 1914. The assembly line was a particular place— a factory through which automobiles moved as they were assembled by workers who specialized in particular tasks. It was also a concept. The concept stressed the complete interchangeability of parts. General Motors adopted the same philosophy. Automobile production relied on other technologies, too, in particular the intensive use of ­electricity— to drive the assembly line, to light the factories, and to run the critical ventilating systems that kept dust from interfering with the machines. The revolutionary assemblyline technique enabled Ford to raise wages and reduce hours while cutting the base price of his Model T from $950 in 1914 to $290 in 1929. It became a standard for many other industries.

410 • CHAPTER 17


Railroad Expansion and the Corporation
 The principal agent of industrial development in the late nineteenth century was still the expansion of the railroads. Railroads gave industrialists access to distant markets and remote sources of raw materials. They were America’s biggest investors, stimulating economic growth through their own enormous expenditures on construction and equipment and sale of their vast tracks of land. Total railroad trackage increased from 30,000 miles in 1860 to 193,000 in 1900. Importance of Government Subsidies Subsidies from federal, state, and local governments (along with foreign loans and investments) were vital to this expansion. Equally important was the emergence of great railroad “combinations” (mergers), many of them dominated by one or two individuals. The achievements (and excesses) of these tycoons—Cornelius Vanderbilt, James J. Hill, Collis P. Huntington, and others—became symbols to much of the nation of concentrated economic power. But railroad development was less significant for the individual barons it created than for its contribution to the growth of a new institution: the modern corporation. There had been various forms of corporations in America since colonial times, but the modern corporation emerged as a major force only after the Civil War. By then, railroad magnates and other industrialists realized that their great ventures could not be financed by any single person. Under the laws of incorporation passed in many states in the 1830s and 1840s, business organizations could raise money by selling stock to members of the public; after the Civil War, one industry after another began doing so. What made these stocks appealing was that investors now had only “limited liability”—they risked only the amount of their

C ANADA
Pacific Time Zone
Mountain Time Zone


Seattle
Portland


Central Time Zone
Eastern Time
Zone


Helena


Boston


Boise


St. Paul


Buffalo
Detroit


CENT


R


AL


PACIF


UNIO


IC


Chicago


N
PACIFIC


Omaha


Kansas City


KANSAS P
ACIFIC


M I SS
OURI
PAC
IFIC


Santa Fe


ISO
N


E
TOPEKA & SANTA F


Los Angeles


ATC


Norfolk


St Louis


Memphis


H


Atlanta


Phoenix


Charleston
El Paso


Houston


 Major railroads added 1870–1890

M EXICO


ATLANTIC
OCEAN


Dallas


 Major railroads in 1870

 Transcontinental railroad

Philadelphia


Washington, D.C.
Denver


San Francisco


PACIFIC
OCEAN


Pittsburgh


Salt Lake City


Reno


New York


Cleveland


Mobile
New Orleans


Gulf of Mexico


 This map illustrates the rapid expansion of railroads in the late nineteenth century. In 1870, there was already a dense network of rail lines in the Northeast and Midwest, illustrated here by the green lines. The red lines show the further expansion of rail coverage between 1870 and 1890, much of it in the South and the areas west of the Mississippi River. • Why were railroads so essential to the nation’s economic growth in these years?

RAILROADS, 1870–1890


INDUSTRIAL SUPREMACY
• 411 

 investments and were not liable for any debts the corporation might accumulate beyond that point. The ability to sell stock to a broad public made it possible for entrepreneurs to gather vast sums of capital and undertake great projects with manageable financial risk. The Pennsylvania and other railroads were among the first to adopt the new corporate form of organization. But incorporation quickly spread beyond the railroad industry. Andrew Carnegie, a Scottish immigrant, worked his way up from modest beginnings and, in 1873, opened his own steelworks in Pittsburgh. Soon he dominated the industry. With his associate Henry Clay Frick, he bought up coal mines and Carnegie, Frick, and Morgan leased part of the Mesabi iron range in Minnesota, operated a fleet of ore ships on the Great Lakes, and acquired railroads. He financed his vast undertakings not only out of his own profits but also out of the sale of stock. Then, in 1901, he sold out for $450 million to the banker J. Pierpont Morgan, who merged the Carnegie interests with others to create the giant United States Steel Corporation—a $14 billion enterprise that controlled almost two-thirds of the nation’s steel production. Other industries developed similarly. Gustavus Swift forged a relatively small meatpacking company into a great national corporation. Isaac Singer patented a sewing machine in 1851 and created I. M. Singer and Company—one of the first modern manufacturing corporations. Large, national business enterprises needed systematic administrative structures. As a result, corporate leaders introduced managerial techniques that relied on the systematic division of responsibilities. Companies built carefully designed hierarchies of control, strict cost-accounting procedures, and a new breed of business executives: the “middle managers,” who formed a layer of command between workers and owners. Efficient administrative capabilities helped make possible another major feature of the modern corporation: consolidation. Businessmen created large consolidated organizations primarily through two methods. Horizontal integration combined a number of firms engaged in the same enterprise into a single corporation such as the consolidation of many different railroad lines into one company. Through vertical integration, a company took over all the different businesses on which it relied for its primary function, for example, Carnegie Steel, which came to control not only steel mills but also mines, railroads, and other enterprises. The most celebrated corporate empire of the late nineteenth century was John D. Rockefeller’s Standard Oil. Shortly after the Civil War, Rockefeller Rockefeller’s Standard Oil launched a refining company in Cleveland and immediately began trying to eliminate his competition. Allying himself with other wealthy capitalists, he formed the Standard Oil Company of Ohio in 1870, which in a few years had acquired twenty of the twenty-five refineries in Cleveland, as well as plants in Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, New York, and Baltimore. So far, Rockefeller had expanded only horizontally—buying many refineries. But soon he began expanding vertically as well. He built his own barrel factories, terminal warehouses, and pipelines. Standard Oil owned its own freight cars and developed its own marketing organization. By the 1880s, Rockefeller had established such dominance within the petroleum industry that to much of the nation he served as a leading symbol of monopoly. Rockefeller and other industrialists saw consolidation as a way to cope with what they believed was the greatest curse of the modern economy: “cutthroat competition.” Most businessmen claimed to believe in free enterprise and a competitive marketplace, but in fact they feared that substantial competition could spell instability and ruin for all.

412 • CHAPTER 17


 As the movement toward consolidation accelerated, new vehicles emerged to facilitate it. The railroads began with so-called pool arrangements—informal agreements among various companies to stabilize rates and divide markets (arrangements that would, in later years, be known as cartels). But the pool arrangements were too weak and could not ensure cost stability. The failure of the pools led to new techniques of consolidation. The next effort to Trusts stabilize prices was the creation of the “trust”—pioneered by Standard Oil in the early 1880s and the banker J. P. Morgan. Under a trust agreement, stockholders in individual corporations transferred their stocks to a small group of trustees in exchange for shares in the trust itself. Owners of trust certificates often had no direct control over the decisions of the trustees; they simply received a share of the profits of the combination. The trustees themselves, on the other hand, might literally own only a few companies but could exercise effective control over many. In 1889, the state of New Jersey helped produce a third form of consolidation by changing its laws of incorporation to permit companies to buy up rivals. Other states soon followed. Once actual corporate mergers were permitted, the original trusts became unnecessary. Rockefeller, for example, quickly relocated Standard Oil to New Jersey and created what became known as a “holding company”—a central corporate body Holding Companies that would buy up the stock of various members of the Standard Oil trust and establish direct, formal ownership of them. By the end of the nineteenth century, 1 percent of the corporations in America were able to control more than 33 percent of the manufacturing. A system of economic organization was emerging that lodged enormous power in the hands of Concentration of Power very few men—the great bankers of New York such as Morgan, industrial titans such as Rockefeller (who himself gained control of a major bank), and others. The industrial giants of the era clearly contributed to substantial economic growth. They were also creating the basis for one of the greatest public controversies of their era: a raging debate over concentrated economic and political power that continued well into the twentieth century.

CAPITALIST CONSERVATISM AND ITS CRITICS
 The inequality of the roaring capitalism of the late nineteenth century was not without its critics. Farmers, workers, middle-class businessmen, and many others considered the new capitalism to be a threat to their own destinies. But the industrial titans built a powerful defense for the new corporate economy.

Survival of the Fittest
 The new rationale for capitalism was based on the belief of individualism—an ideology that would remain at the heart of American conservatism for many decades. Wealthy capitalists defended their wealth by saying that they had earned their wealth and power through their own hard work and their acquisitiveness and thrift. Those who failed had only themselves to blame—a result of ignorance, stupidity, or laziness. Conservative social theories helped support the belief that through “survival of the fittest” wealthy capitalists deserved their success. Among them was the theory of Social Darwinism. Darwin’s theories argued that the fittest forms of life survived over thousands

Ideology of Individualism


INDUSTRIAL SUPREMACY
• 413 

 of years because of their biological fitness. Social Darwinism argued that individuals rose or fell in society because of their innate “fitness.” (Darwin himself, along with most scientists, debunked Social Darwinism, but many Americans embraced it nevertheless.) The English philosopher and biologist Herbert Spencer introduced the theory of Social Darwinism in his book Principles of Biology (1864). Society, he argued, benefited from the elimination of the unfit and the survival of the strong and talented. William Graham Sumner, a sociologist at Yale, borrowed from Spencer’s theory and created a theory of his own in his famous 1906 book Folkways. Those who failed, he argued in a 1913 essay, were unfit for success: “Before the tribunal of nature a man has no more right to life than a rattlesnake; he has no more right to liberty than any wild beast; his right to pursuit of happiness is nothing but a license to maintain the struggle for existence.” Wealthy corporate leaders were attracted to the ideas of Spencer and Sumner. Their success confirmed their own virtues and “fitness.” Capitalists argued that they earned their wealth through the honest, all-American virtues of competition and the free market. But critics of the industrial and financial titans claimed that they earned their wealth not because of the innate fitness of those who succeeded, but because they replaced the natural workings of the marketplace by building great monopolies that would protect them from competition.

The Gospel of Wealth
 Some businessmen attempted to temper the harsh philosophy of Social Darwinism with a gentler, if in some ways equally self-serving, idea: the “gospel of wealth.” People of great wealth, they argued, had not only great power but also a great responsibility to use their riches to advance social progress. Elaborating on this creed in his 1889 article “The Gospel of Wealth,” and elaborated on in the 1901 book of the same title, Andrew Carnegie wrote that people of wealth should consider all revenues in excess of their own needs to be “trust funds” used for the good of the community. (See “Consider the Source: Andrew Carnegie Explains “The Gospel of Wealth.” ”) Carnegie was only one of many industrialists who devoted large parts of their fortunes to philanthropic works. The idea of private wealth as a public blessing existed alongside another popular concept: the notion of great wealth as something available to all. Russell H. Conwell, a Baptist minister, became one of the most prominent spokesmen for the idea by delivering one lecture, “Acres of Diamonds,” more than 6,000 times between 1880 and 1900. Conwell told a series of stories, which he claimed were true, of individuals who had found opportunities for extraordinary wealth in their own backyards. (One such story involved a modest farmer who discovered a vast diamond mine in his own fields.) Most of the millionaires in the country, Conwell claimed (inaccurately), had begun on the lowest rung of the economic ladder and had worked their way to success. But the most famous promoter of the success story was Horatio Alger. He was originally a minister in a small town in Massachusetts but was driven from his Horatio Alger pulpit as a result of sexual scandals. He moved to New York, where he wrote over 100 celebrated novels—all of them tributes to social mobility and the ability of Americans to rise from “rags to riches.” (See “Patterns of Popular Culture: The Novels of Horatio Alger.”) If Alger’s rags-to-riches tales captured the aspiration of many men, Louisa May Alcott’s enormously popular novels helped give voice to the often unstated Louisa May Alcott ­ambitions of many women. Alcott was the daughter of a noted New England reformer,

CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
ANDREW CARNEGIE EXPLAINS “THE GOSPEL OF
WEALTH,” 1889
 Writing for a general audience in the literary and culture magazine The North American Review, billionaire Andrew Carnegie made one of the industrial age’s most famous arguments about the inherent justness of the unequal distribution of economic power and wealth. The problem of our age is the proper administration of wealth, that the ties of brotherhood may still bind together the rich and poor in harmonious relationship. The conditions of human life have not only been changed, but revolutionized, within the past few hundred years. In former days there was little difference between the dwelling, dress, food, and environment of the chief and those of his retainers. The Indians are today where civilized man then was. . . . The contrast between the palace of the millionaire and the cottage of the laborer with us to-day measures the change which has come with civilization. This change, however, is not to be deplored, but welcomed as highly beneficial. It is well, nay, essential, for the progress of the race that the houses of some should be homes for all that is highest and best in literature and the arts,—and for all the refinements of civilization, rather than that none should be so. Much better this great irregularity than universal squalor. . . . The “good old times” were not good old times. Neither master nor servant was as well situated then as to-day. A relapse to old conditions would be disastrous to both—not the least so to him who serves—and would sweep away civilization with it. But whether the change be for good or ill, it is upon us, beyond our power to alter, and, therefore, to be accepted and made the best of. It is a waste of time to criticize the inevitable. It is easy to see how the change has come. . . . In the manufacture of products we have the whole story. . . . To-day the world 414 •

 obtains commodities of excellent quality at prices which even the preceding generation would have deemed incredible. The poor enjoy what the rich could not before afford. What were the luxuries have become the necessaries of life. The laborer has now more comforts than the farmer had a few generations ago. The farmer has more luxuries than the landlord had, and is more richly clad and better housed. The landlord has books and pictures rarer and appointments more artistic than the king could then obtain. The price we pay for this salutary change is, no doubt, great. . . . Under the law of competition, the employer of thousands is forced into the strictest economies, among which the rates paid to labor figure prominently, and often there is friction between the employer and the employed, between capital and labor, between rich and poor. Human society loses homogeneity. The price which society pays for the law of competition, like the price it pays for cheap comforts and luxuries, is also great; but the advantages of this law are also greater still than its cost—for it is to this law that we owe our wonderful material development, which brings improved conditions in its train. But, whether the law be benign or not, we must say of it, as we say of the change in the conditions of men to which we have referred: It is here; we cannot evade it; no substitutes for it have been found; and while the law may be sometimes hard for the individual, it is best for the race, because it insures the survival of the fittest in every department. What is the proper mode of administering wealth after the laws upon which civilization is founded have thrown it into the hands of the few? . . . There remains . . . only one mode of using great fortunes; in this we have the true antidote for the temporary unequal distribution

 of wealth, the reconciliation of the rich and the poor—a reign of harmony. . . . It is founded upon the present most intense Individualism, and the race is prepared to put it in practice by degrees whenever it pleases. Under its sway we shall have an ideal State, in which the surplus wealth of the few will become, in the best sense, the property of the many, because administered for the common good; and this wealth, passing through the hands of the few, can be made a much more potent force for the elevation of our race than if distributed in small sums to the people themselves. Even the poorest can be made to see this, and to agree that great sums gathered by some of their fellow-­ citizens and spent for public purposes, from which the masses reap the principal benefit, are more valuable to them than if scattered among themselves in trifling amounts through the course of many years. . . . Poor and restricted are our opportunities in this life, narrow our horizon, our best work most imperfect; but rich men should be thankful for one inestimable boon. They have it in their power during their lives to busy themselves in organizing benefactions from which the masses of their fellows will derive lasting advantage, and thus dignify their own lives. The highest life is probably to be reached, not by such imitation of the life of Christ as Count Tolstoi gives us, but, while animated by Christ’s spirit, by recognizing the changed conditions of this age, and adopting modes of expressing this spirit suitable to the changed conditions under which we live, still laboring for the good of our fellows, which was the essence of his life and teaching, but laboring in a different manner. This, then, is held to be the duty of the man of wealth: To set an example of modest, unostentatious living, shunning display or extravagance; to provide moderately for the legitimate wants of those dependent upon him; and, after doing so, to consider all surplus revenues which come to him simply as trust funds,

 which he is called upon to administer, and strictly bound as a matter of duty to administer in the manner which, in his judgment, is best calculated to produce the most beneficial results for the community—the man of wealth thus becoming the mere trustee and agent for his poorer brethren, bringing to their service his superior wisdom, experience, and ability to administer, doing for them better than they would or could do for themselves. . . . [T]he best means of benefiting the community is to place within its reach the ladders upon which the aspiring can rise—free libraries, parks, and means of recreation, by which men are helped in body and mind; works of art, certain to give pleasure and improve the public taste; and public institutions of various kinds, which will improve the general condition of the people; in this manner returning their surplus wealth to the mass of their fellows in the forms best calculated to do them lasting good. Thus is the problem of rich and poor to be solved. The laws of accumulation will be left free, the laws of distribution free. Individualism will continue, but the millionaire will be but a trustee for the poor, intrusted for a season with a great part of the increased wealth of the community, but administering it for the community far better than it could or would have done for itself. . . . Such, in my opinion, is the true gospel concerning wealth, obedience to which is destined some day to solve the problem of the rich and the poor, and to bring “Peace on earth, among men good will.” UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE 1. What did Carnegie think of the inequal-

 ity of wealth in industrial America? What were the wealthy supposed to do in this inequality of wealth, and what role did Andrew Carnegie envision for the poor? 2. What was the price of this new inequality?

 Source: Andrew Carnegie, “Wealth,” North American Review (1889), located in: Michael P. Johnson, Reading the American Past: Selected Historical Documents, vol. 2: From 1865, 5th ed. (Boston: Bedford St. Martin’s, 2012), pp. 52–55.

• 415


PATTERNS OF POPULAR CULTURE


The Novels of Horatio Alger
 A young boy, perhaps an orphan, makes his way through life on the rough streets of the city by selling newspapers or peddling matches. One day, his energy and determination catch the eye of a wealthy man, who gives him a chance to improve himself. Through honesty, charm, hard work, and aggressiveness, the boy rises in the world to become a successful man. That, in a nutshell, is the story that Horatio Alger presented to his vast public in novel after novel—over 100 of them in all—for over forty years. During his lifetime, Americans bought millions of copies of his novels. After his death in 1899, his books (and others written in his name) continued to sell at an astonishing rate. Even today, when the books themselves are largely forgotten, the name Horatio Alger has come to represent the idea of individual advancement through (in a phrase Alger coined) “pluck and luck.” Alger was born in 1832 into a middleclass New England family, attended Harvard, and spent a short time as a Unitarian minister. In the mid-1850s, he turned to writing stories and books, and he continued to do so for the rest of his life. His most famous novel, Ragged Dick, was published in 1868. Almost all of his books were fables of a young man’s rise “from rags to riches.” The purpose of his writing, he claimed, was twofold. He wanted to “exert a salutary influence upon the class of whom [he] was writing, by setting before them inspiring examples of what energy, ambition, and an honest purpose may achieve.” He also wanted to show his largely middle-class readers “the life and experiences of the friendless and vagrant children to be found in all our cities.” 416 •

 Most Americans of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries were attracted to Alger’s stories because the stories helped them believe in one of the most cherished national myths: that with willpower and hard work, individuals could rise in the world. That belief was all the more important in the late nineteenth century when large-scale corporate industrialization was making it increasingly difficult for individuals to control their own fates.

A NEWSBOY’S STORY
Alger’s novels were even more popular after his death in 1899 than they had been in his lifetime. This reprint of one of his many rags-to-riches stories—about a New York newsboy’s rise to wealth and success—was typical of his work. (© Granger, NYC—All Rights Reserved.) 
 Alger placed great emphasis on the moral qualities of his heroes; their success was a reward for their virtue. But many of his readers ignored the moral message and clung simply to the image of sudden and dramatic success. After the author’s death, his publishers abridged many of Alger’s works, eliminating the parts of his stories where the heroes do good deeds and ­focusing solely on the success of Alger’s ­heroes in rising in the world. Alger himself had very mixed feelings about the new industrial order he described. His books were meant to reveal not just the opportunities for advancement it sometimes created, but also its cruelty. That was one reason that in almost all his books, his heroes triumphed not just because of their own virtues or efforts, but because of some amazing stroke of luck. To Alger, at least, the modern age did not guarantee success through hard work alone; there had to be some providential assistance as well. Over time, however, Alger’s admirers ignored his own m ­ isgivings

 about industrialism and ­ portrayed his books purely as celebrations of (and justifications for) laissez-faire ­capitalism and the accumulation of wealth. An example of the transformation of Alger into a symbol of individual achievement is the Horatio Alger Award, established in 1947 by the American Schools and Colleges Association to honor “living individuals who by their own efforts [have] pulled themselves up by their bootstraps in the American tradition.” Among its recipients have been Presidents Dwight D. Eisenhower and Ronald Reagan, evangelist Billy Graham, and Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. How do Alger’s novels both defend in-

 dustrial capitalism and criticize it? 2. According to the essay, Alger placed

 great emphasis on the moral qualities of his heroes, but his publishers later eliminated that aspect of the novels. Why?

 but her family nevertheless experienced considerable hardship. After serving as a nurse in the Civil War and writing a series of popular adventure novels (under a pen name, A. M. Barnard, that disguised her gender), she became a major literary figure with the publication of Little Women in 1869 and two sequels over the next twenty years. The main character in these novels, Jo March, struggles to build a life for herself that is not defined by conventional women’s roles and ambitions. She spurns a conventional marriage and eventually weds a professor who appears to support her literary ambitions. “Girls write to ask who the little women marry, as if that was the only end and aim of a woman’s life,” Alcott wrote a friend. “I won’t marry Jo to Laurie [the attractive, wealthy neighbor who proposes to her] to please any one.” Alcott’s female characters, in some ways like Alger’s male ones, are remarkable for their independence and drive. Jo March is willful, rebellious, stubborn, ambitious, and often selfish—far from the posed, romantic, submissive women in most popular sentimental novels of Alcott’s time aimed at female audiences.

Alternative Visions
 Alongside the celebrations of competition and the justifications for great wealth stood a group of alternative philosophies, challenging the corporate ethos and, at times, capitalism itself. One such philosophy came from the sociologist Lester Frank Ward. In Dynamic Sociology (1883) and other books, he argued that civilization was not governed by n­ atural selection but by human intelligence, which could shape society as it wished. In contrast to • 417

418 • CHAPTER 17


 Cornelius Vanderbilt, known as the “Commodore,” accumulated one of America’s great fortunes by consolidating several large railroad companies in the 1860s. His name became a synonym not only for enormous wealth but also (in the eyes of many Americans) for excessive corporate power—as suggested in this cartoon, showing him standing astride his empire and manipulating its parts. (© Niday Picture Library/Alamy) “MODERN COLOSSUS OF (RAIL) ROADS”

 Sumner, who believed that state intervention to remodel the environment was futile, Ward thought that an active government engaged in positive planning was society’s best hope. Other Americans adopted more-radical approaches to reform. Some dissenters found a home in the Socialist Labor Party, founded in the 1870s and led for many years by Daniel De Leon, an immigrant from the West Indies. Although De Leon attracted a following in

INDUSTRIAL SUPREMACY
• 419 

 the industrial cities, the party never became a major political force and never polled more than 82,000 votes. A dissident faction of De Leon’s party, eager to forge stronger ties with organized labor, broke away and in 1901 formed the more American Socialist Party enduring American Socialist Party. Other radicals gained a wider following. Among them was the California writer and activist Henry George. His angrily eloquent Progress and Poverty, published in 1879, Henry George became one of the best-selling nonfiction works in American publishing history. George blamed social problems on the ability of a few monopolists to grow wealthy as a result of rising land values. An increase in the value of land, he claimed, was not a result of any effort by the owner, but an “unearned increment,” produced by the growth of society around the land. Such profits were rightfully the property of the community. And so George proposed a “single tax” on land, to replace all other taxes, which would return the increment to the people. The tax, he argued, would destroy monopolies, distribute wealth more equally, and eliminate poverty. Rivaling George in popularity was Edward Bellamy, whose utopian novel Looking Backward, published in 1888, sold more than 1 million copies. It described Edward Bellamy the experiences of a young Bostonian who went into a hypnotic sleep in 1887 and awoke in the year 2000 to find a new social order in which want, politics, and vice were unknown. The new society had emerged through a peaceful, evolutionary process: the large trusts of the late nineteenth century had continued to grow in size and to combine with one another until ultimately they formed a single, great trust, controlled by the government, which distributed the abundance of the industrial economy equally among all the people. “Fraternal cooperation” had replaced competition. Class divisions had disappeared. Bellamy labeled the philosophy behind this vision “nationalism.”

The Problems of Monopoly
 Relatively few Americans shared the views of those who questioned capitalism itself. But as time went on, a growing number of people were becoming deeply concerned about the growth of monopoly. By the end of the century, a wide range of groups had begun to assail monopoly and economic concentration. In the absence of competition, they argued, monopolistic industries could charge whatever prices they wished. Railroads, in particular, charged very high rates along some routes because they knew their customers had no choice but to pay them. Beginning in 1873, the economy fluctuated erratically, producing severe recessions every five or six years, each worse than the last.

THE ORDEAL OF THE WORKER
 Most workers in the late nineteenth century experienced a real rise in their standard of living. But they did so at the cost of arduous and often dangerous working conditions, diminishing control over their own work, and a growing sense of powerlessness.

The Immigrant Workforce
 The industrial workforce expanded dramatically in the late nineteenth century as a result of massive migration into industrial cities. Rural Americans continued to flow into factory towns and cities—people disillusioned with or bankrupted by life on the farm. There was

420 • CHAPTER 17


 also a great wave of immigration from abroad (primarily from Europe, but also from Asia, Canada, Mexico, and other areas) in the decades following the Civil War—an influx greater than that of any previous era. The 25 million immigrants who arrived in the United States between 1865 and 1915 were more than four times the number who had arrived in the previous fifty years. In the 1870s and 1880s, most of the immigrants came from England, Ireland, and northern Europe. By the end of the century, however, the major sources of immigrants had shifted, with large numbers of southern and eastern Europeans (Italians, Poles, Russians, Greeks, Slavs, and others) moving into the country and into the industrial workforce. The new immigrants came to America in part to escape poverty and oppression in their homelands. But they were also attracted by expectations of new opportunities. Railroads lured immigrants into their western landholdings by distributing misleading advertisements overseas. Industrial employers actively recruited immigrant workers under the Labor Contract Law, which—until its repeal in 1885—permitted them to pay for the passage of workers in advance and deduct the amount later from their wages. Even after the repeal of the law, employers continued to encourage the immigration of unskilled laborers, often with the assistance of foreign-born labor brokers, such as the Greek and Italian padrones, who recruited work gangs of their fellow nationals. The arrival of these new groups heightened ethnic tensions within the working class. Job Competition Low-paid Poles, Greeks, and French Canadians began to displace higherpaid British and Irish workers in the textile factories of New England. Italians, Slavs, and Poles emerged as a major source of labor for the mining industry. Chinese and Mexicans competed with Anglo-Americans and African Americans in mining, farmwork, and factory labor in California, Colorado, and Texas.

Wages and Working Conditions
 At the turn of the century, the average income of the American worker was $400 to $500 a year—below the $600 figure that many believed was required to maintain a reasonable level of comfort. Nor did workers have much job security. All were vulnerable to the boom-and-bust cycle of the industrial economy and the instability caused by technological advances. Even those who kept their jobs could find their wages suddenly and substantially cut in hard times. Few workers, in other words, were ever very far from poverty. Many first-generation workers, accustomed to the patterns of agrarian life, had trouble adjusting to the nature of modern industrial labor: routine, repetitive tasks on a strict and monotonous schedule. Skilled artisans, whose once-valued tasks were now performed by machines, found the new system impersonal and demeaning. Most factory laborers worked ten hours a day, six days a week; in the steel industry they worked twelve hours a day. Industrial accidents were frequent. The decreasing need for skilled work in factories induced many employers to increase the use of women and children, whom they could hire for lower wages than adult males. By 1900, 20 percent of all manufacturing workers were women. Women labored in all areas of industry, even in some of the most arduous jobs. Most women, however, worked in a few industries where unskilled and semiskilled machine labor (as opposed to heavy manual labor) prevailed. The textile industry remained the largest single industrial employer of women. (Domestic service, though, remained the most common female occupation overall.) Women worked for wages well below the minimum necessary for survival (and well below the wages paid to men working the same jobs).

INDUSTRIAL SUPREMACY
• 421 

 Young boys, some of them barefoot, clamber among the great textile machines in a Georgia cotton mill, mending broken threads and replacing empty bobbins. Many of them were the children or siblings of women who worked in the plant. The photograph is by Lewis Hine, who traveled around the country documenting abuses for the National Child Labor Committee. (© Bettmann/Corbis) SPINDLE BOYS

 At least 1.7 million children under sixteen years of age were employed in factories and fields; 10 percent of all girls aged ten to fifteen, and 20 percent of all boys, held jobs. Under public pressure, thirty-eight states passed child labor laws in the late Child Labor nineteenth century. But 60 percent of child workers were employed in agriculture, which was typically exempt from the laws. For children employed in factories, the laws merely set a minimum age of twelve years and a maximum workday of ten hours, standards that employers often ignored in any case.

Emerging Unionization
 Laborers attempted to fight back against such conditions by creating national unions. By the end of the century, however, their efforts had met with little success. There had been craft unions in America, representing small groups of skilled workers, since well before the Civil War. But most unions could not hope to exert significant power in the economy. And during the turbulent recession years of the 1870s, unions faced the additional problem of widespread public hostility. When labor disputes with employers turned bitter and violent, as they occasionally did, much of the public instinctively blamed the workers for the trouble, rarely the employers. Particularly alarming to middle-class Americans was the emergence of the “Molly Maguires,” Molly Maguires

422 • CHAPTER 17


 an Irish secret ­society, in the anthracite coal region of western Pennsylvania. This militant labor organization sometimes used violence and even murder in its battle with coal operators. Excitement over the Molly Maguires paled beside the near hysteria that gripped the Railroad Strike of 1877 country during the railroad strike of 1877, which began when the eastern railroads announced a 10 percent wage cut and soon expanded into something approaching a class war. Strikers disrupted rail service from Baltimore to St. Louis, destroyed equipment, and rioted in the streets of Pittsburgh and other cities. State militias were called out, and in July President Hayes ordered federal troops to suppress the disorders. In Baltimore, eleven demonstrators died and forty were wounded in a conflict between workers and militiamen. In Philadelphia, the state militia killed twenty people when the troops opened fire on thousands of workers and their families who were attempting to block the railroad crossings. In all, over 100 people died before the strike finally collapsed several weeks after it had begun. The great railroad strike was America’s first major national labor conflict.

The Knights of Labor
 In the first major effort to create a genuinely national labor organization, the Noble Order of the Knights of Labor was founded in 1869 under the leadership of Uriah S. Stephens. Membership was open to all who “toiled,” a definition that included all workers, most business and professional people, and virtually all women—whether they worked in factories, as domestic servants, or in their own homes. Only lawyers, bankers, liquor dealers, and professional gamblers were excluded. The Knights of Labor championed an eight-hour workday and the abolition of child labor, but they were more interested in long-range reform of the economy. The Knights hoped to replace the “wage system” with a new “cooperative system,” in which workers would themselves control their workplaces. For several years, the Knights remained a secret fraternal organization. But in the late 1870s, under the leadership of Terence V. Powderly, the order moved into the open and entered a period of spectacular expansion. By 1886, it claimed a total membership of over 700,000. Local unions or assemblies associated with the Knights launched a series of railroad and other strikes in the 1880s in defiance of Powderly’s wishes. Their failures to win any meaningful concessions helped discredit the organization. By 1890, membership of the Knights had shrunk to 100,000. A few years later, the organization disappeared altogether.

The American Federation of Labor
 Even before the Knights began to decline, a rival association appeared. In 1881, representatives of a number of craft unions formed the Federation of Organized Trade and Labor Unions of the United States and Canada. Five years later, this body took the name it has borne ever since, the American Federation of Labor (AFL). Rejecting the Knights’ idea of one big union for everybody, the federation was an association of essentially autonomous craft unions that represented mainly skilled workers. Samuel Gompers Samuel Gompers, the powerful leader of the AFL, concentrated on labor’s immediate objectives: wages, hours, and working conditions. As one of its first objectives, the AFL demanded a national eight-hour workday and called for a general strike if the

INDUSTRIAL SUPREMACY
• 423 

 goal was not achieved by May 1, 1886. On that day, strikes and demonstrations for a shorter workday took place all over the country. In Chicago, a center of labor and radical strength, a strike was already in progress at the McCormick Harvester Company. City police had been harassing the strikers, and labor and radical leaders called a protest meeting at Haymarket Square on May 1. Haymarket Bombing When the police ordered the crowd to disperse, someone threw a bomb that killed seven policemen and injured sixty-seven others. The police, who had killed four strikers the day before, fired into the crowd and killed four more people. Conservative, property-conscious Americans—frightened and outraged—demanded retribution. Chicago officials finally rounded up eight anarchists and charged them with murder, on the grounds that their statements had incited whoever had hurled the bomb. All eight scapegoats were found guilty after a remarkably injudicious trial. Seven were sentenced to death. One of them committed suicide, four were executed, and two had their sentences commuted to life imprisonment. To most middle-class Americans, the Haymarket bombing was an alarming symbol of social chaos and radicalism. “Anarchism” now became in the public mind a code word for terrorism and violence, even though most anarchists were relatively peaceful. For the next thirty years, the specter of anarchism remained one of the most frightening concepts in the American imagination. Business owners exploited it to smear labor leaders and disrupt their activities. It became a constant obstacle to the goals of the AFL and other labor organizations, and it did particular damage to the Knights of Labor. However much they tried to distance themselves from radicals, labor leaders were always vulnerable to accusations of anarchism, as the violent strikes of the 1890s occasionally illustrated.

The Homestead Strike
 The Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel Workers was the most powerful trade union in the country in the late 1800s. Its members were skilled workers, in great demand by employers, and they had long been able to exercise significant power in the workplace. In the mid-1880s, however, demand for skilled workers declined as new production methods changed the steelmaking process. In the streamlined Carnegie system, which was coming to dominate the steel industry, the union was able to maintain a foothold in only one of the corporation’s three major factories—the Homestead plant near Pittsburgh. By 1890, Carnegie and his chief lieutenant, Henry Clay Frick, had decided that the Amalgamated “had to go.” Over the next two years, they repeatedly cut wages at Homestead. At first, the union acquiesced, aware that it was not strong enough to wage a successful strike. But in 1892, when the company stopped even discussing its decisions with the union and gave it two days to accept another wage cut, the Amalgamated called for a strike. Frick abruptly shut down the plant and called in 300 guards from the Pinkerton Detective Agency, well known as strikebreakers, to enable the company to hire Pinkertons nonunion workers. They approached the plant by river, on barges, on July 6, 1892. The strikers poured gasoline on the water, set it on fire, and then met the Pinkertons at the docks with guns and dynamite. After several hours of fighting, which killed three guards and ten strikers and injured many others, the Pinkertons surrendered and were escorted roughly out of town. But the workers’ victory was temporary. The governor of Pennsylvania, at the company’s request, sent the state’s entire National Guard contingent, some 8,000 men, to

424 • CHAPTER 17


 Homestead. Production resumed, with strikebreakers now protected by troops. And public opinion turned against the strikers when a radical made an attempt to assassinate Frick. Slowly, workers drifted back to their jobs, and finally—four months after the strike began—the Amalgamated surrendered. By 1900, every major steel plant in the Northeast had broken with the Amalgamated. Its membership shrank from a high of 24,000 in 1891 (two-thirds of all eligible steelworkers) to fewer than 7,000 a decade later.

The Pullman Strike
 A dispute of greater magnitude, if less violence, was the Pullman strike in 1894. The Pullman Palace Car Company manufactured railroad sleeping and parlor cars at a plant near Chicago. There the company constructed a 600-acre town, Pullman, and rented its trim, orderly houses to the employees. George M. Pullman, owner of the company, saw the town as a model—a solution to the problems of industrial workers. But many residents chafed at the regimentation (and the high rents). In the winter of 1893–1894, the Pullman Company slashed wages by about 25 percent, citing its own declining revenues in the depression, without reducing the rent it charged its employees. Workers went on strike and persuaded the militant American Railway Union, led by Eugene V. Debs, to support Eugene V. Debs and the Railway Union them by refusing to handle Pullman cars and equipment. Within a few days, thousands of railroad workers in twenty-seven states and territories were on strike, and transportation from Chicago to the Pacific Coast shut down. Unlike most elected politicians, the governor of Illinois, John Peter Altgeld, was a man with demonstrated sympathies for workers and their grievances. He refused to call out the militia to protect employers. Infuriated, railroad operators bypassed Altgeld and asked the federal government to send regular army troops to Illinois, using the pretext that the strike was preventing the movement of mail on the trains. In July 1894, President Grover Cleveland ordered 2,000 troops to the Chicago area. A federal court issued an injunction forbidding the union to continue the strike. When Debs and his associates defied it, they were arrested and imprisoned. With federal troops protecting the hiring of new workers and with the union leaders in a federal jail, the strike quickly collapsed.

Sources of Labor Weakness
 In the last decades of the nineteenth century, labor made few real gains despite militant organizing efforts. Industrial wages rose hardly at all. To be sure, labor leaders won a few legislative victories—the abolition of the Contract Labor Law, the establishment of an eight-hour day for government employees, compensation for some workers injured on the job, and others. But many such laws were not enforced. Widespread strikes and protests, and many other working-class forms of resistance, large and small, led to few enduring gains. The end of the century found most workers with less political power and less control of the workplace than they had had forty years before. Workers failed to make greater gains for many reasons. The principal labor organizations represented only a small percentage of the industrial workforce; the AFL, the most important, blatantly excluded unskilled workers and most women, blacks, and recent immigrants. Divisions within the workforce, such as tensions among different ethnic and racial groups, contributed further to union weakness. Another source of labor weakness was the shifting nature of the workforce. Many immigrant workers came to America intending to earn some money and then return home.

INDUSTRIAL SUPREMACY
• 425 

 The assumption that they had no long-range future in the country tamed their enthusiasm to organize. Other workers were in constant motion, moving from one job to another, one town to another, seldom in a single place long enough to establish any institutional ties or exert any real power. Above all, perhaps, workers made few gains in the late nineteenth century because they faced corporate organizations of vast wealth and power, which were generally determined to crush any efforts by workers to challenge their prerogatives. And as the Homestead and Pullman strikes suggest, the corporations usually had the support of local, state, and federal authorities, who were willing to send in troops to “preserve order” and crush labor uprisings on demand. Despite the creation of new labor unions and a wave of strikes and protests, workers in the late nineteenth century failed on the whole to create successful organizations or to protect their interests. In the battle for power within the emerging industrial economy, almost all the advantages seemed to lie with capital.

CONCLUSION
 In the four decades after the Civil War, the United States propelled itself into the forefront of the industrializing nations of the world. Large areas of the nation remained overwhelmingly rural, to be sure. But even so, America’s economy, and along with it the nation’s society and culture, was being profoundly transformed. New technologies, new forms of corporate management, and new supplies of labor helped make possible the rapid growth of the nation’s industries and the construction of its railroads. The factory system contributed to the growth of the nation’s cities. Immigration provided a steady supply of new workers for the growing industrial economy. The result was a steady increase in national wealth, rising living standards for much of the population, and the creation of great new fortunes. But industrialization did not spread its fruits evenly. Large areas of the country, most notably the South, and large groups in the population, most notably minorities, women, and recent immigrants, profited relatively little from economic growth. Industrial workers experienced arduous conditions of labor. Small merchants and manufacturers found themselves overmatched by great new combinations. Industrialists strove to create a rationale for their power and to persuade the public that everyone had something to gain from it. But many Americans remained skeptical of modern capitalism, and some—workers struggling to form unions, reformers denouncing trusts, socialists envisioning a new world, and many others—created broad and powerful critiques of the new economic order. Industrialization brought both progress and pain to late-nineteenth-century America. Controversies over its effects defined the era and would continue to define the first decades of the twentieth century.

KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
American Federation of
Labor 422
American Socialist
Party 419


Andrew Carnegie 411
Edward Bellamy 419
Eugene V. Debs 424
 gospel of wealth 413

 Haymarket bombing 423 Henry Clay Frick 411 Henry Ford 408 Henry George 419

426 • CHAPTER 17


Homestead Strike 423
Horatio Alger 413
 horizontal integration 411 John D. Rockefeller 411 J. P. Morgan 411 Knights of Labor 422

Louisa May Alcott 413
Molly Maguires 421
 monopoly 419 Pullman strike 424 Samuel Gompers 422 Social Darwinism 412

Taylorism 409
 vertical integration 411 Wilbur and Orville Wright 408

RECALL AND REFLECT
 1. Who were some of the business and industrial titans of the late nineteenth century,

 and what did they contribute to America’s industrial growth? 2. What changes took place in corporate organization in the late nineteenth century,

 and how did these changes affect the nation’s economy? 3. What was the gospel of wealth? 4. How did Social Darwinism attempt to justify the social consequences of industrial

 capitalism? 5. How did workers respond to the expansion of industrialization and the new industrial

 economy?



THE AGE OF
THE CITY
THE NEW URBAN GROWTH
THE URBAN LANDSCAPE
STRAINS OF URBAN LIFE
THE RISE OF MASS CONSUMPTION
LEISURE IN THE CONSUMER SOCIETY
HIGH CULTURE IN THE URBAN AGE


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. What were some of the problems that resulted from rapid urbanization, and how did urban governments respond to these problems? 2. How did the sources of immigration to America shift in the late nineteenth century, and what was the native response to the change? 3. How did the rise of mass consumption affect leisure and entertainment?

THE FACE OF AMERICAN SOCIETY
was transformed in countless ways by the growth of industry and commerce. But no change was more profound than the growing size and influence of cities. Having begun its life as a primarily agrarian republic, the United States in the late nineteenth century was becoming an urban nation. 
• 427


THE NEW URBAN
GROWTH


TIME LINE
 First intercollegiate football game

Boston and Chicago
 fires

 NYC opens first elevated railroads

 Boss Tweed convicted

 Baseball’s National League founded

 Congress restricts Chinese immigration

 First “skyscraper” in Chicago



 Riis’s How the Other Half Lives

 Basketball invented



Immigration
Restriction League
 formed

 Boston opens first subway in America Chopin’s The Awakening Baseball’s American League founded

First World Series


428 •


 Although the great movement of people to the city was not unique to the United States, Americans found urbanization particularly jarring. The urban population increased sevenfold in the half century after the Civil War. And in 1920, the census revealed that for the first time, a majority of the American people lived in “urban” areas—defined as communities of 2,500 people or more. Natural increase accounted for only a small part of the urban growth. Families in cities experienced a high rate of infant mortality, a declining fertility rate, and a high death rate from disease. It was immigration, rather, that expanded the urban population so dramatically.

The Migrations
 In the late nineteenth century, Americans left the declining agricultural regions of the East at a dramatic rate. Some moved to the newly developing farmlands of the West. But almost as many moved to the growing cities of the East and the Midwest. Among those leaving rural America for industrial cities in the 1880s were black men and women trying to escape the poverty, debt, violence, and oppression they faced in the rural South. They were also seeking new opportunities in cities. Factory jobs for African Americans were rare and professional opportunities almost nonexistent. Urban blacks tended to work in service occupations as cooks, janitors, domestic servants, and so on. Because many such jobs were considered women’s work, black women often outnumbered black men in the cities. The most important source of urban population growth, however, was the great number of new immigrants from abroad— part of a larger pattern of mobility around

THE AGE OF THE CITY
• 429 

 the world. (See “America in the World: Global Migrations.”) Some came from Canada, Latin America, and—particularly on the West Coast—China and Japan. But the greatest number came from Europe. After 1880, the flow of new arrivals began to include large numbers of people from southern and eastern Europe. By the 1890s, more than half of all immigrants came from these regions. In earlier years, most new immigrants from Europe (particularly Germans and Scandinavians) had arrived with at least some money and education. Most of them arrived at one of the major port cities on the Atlantic Coast (the greatest number landing at New York’s immigrant depot at Castle Garden) and then headed west. But the new immigrants of the late nineteenth century generally lacked the capital to buy farmland and lacked the education to establish themselves in professions. So, like similarly poor Irish immigrants before the Civil War, they settled overwhelmingly in industrial cities, where they worked largely in unskilled jobs.

The Ethnic City
 By 1890, most of the population of the major cities consisted of immigrants: 87 percent of the population in Chicago, 80 percent in New York, 84 percent in Milwaukee and 2.98

 Total immigration during five-year periods (in millions)



2.27
2.12
1.73
1.56


1.51


1.09
.80




1861– 1866– 1871– 1876– 1881– 1886– 1891– 1896–
1865 1870 1875 1880 1885 1890 1895 1900
Year


 Over 10 million immigrants from abroad entered the United States in the last forty years of the nineteenth century, with particularly high numbers arriving in the 1880s and 1890s. This chart shows the pattern of immigration in five-year intervals. • What external events might help explain some of the rises and falls in the rates of immigration in these years? TOTAL IMMIGRATION, 1861–1900

