616 • CHAPTER 25


 about the insistence of the Chinese leader Chiang Kai-shek on expanding his government’s power in Manchuria, officially a part of China but over which the Japanese had maintained informal economic control since 1905. In 1931, Japan’s military leaders staged what was, in effect, a coup in Tokyo. Shortly after that, a railroad explosion in southern Manchuria, Manchuria Invaded likely set by Japanese soldiers (and known as the “Mukden Incident”), served as a pretext for a Japanese invasion of northern Manchuria. They had conquered the region by the end of the year. Secretary of State Henry Stimson issued stern warnings to the Japanese but to no avail. Early in 1932, Japan moved farther into China, attacking the city of Shanghai and killing thousands of civilians. (For details on the ensuing war, see “America in the World: The Sino-Japanese War, 1931–1941.”)

ISOLATIONISM AND INTERNATIONALISM
 The administration of Franklin Roosevelt faced a dual challenge as it entered office in 1933. It had to deal with the worst economic crisis in the nation’s history, and it had to deal as well with the effects of a decaying international structure.

Depression Diplomacy
 Perhaps Roosevelt’s sharpest break with the policies of his predecessor was on the question of American economic relations with Europe. Hoover had argued that only by resolving the question of war debts and reinforcing the gold standard could the American economy hope to recover. He had, therefore, agreed to participate in the World Economic Conference, to be held in London in June 1933, to attempt to resolve these issues. By the time the conference assembled, however, Roosevelt had already become convinced that the gold value of the dollar had to be allowed to fall in order for American goods to compete in world markets. Shortly after the conference convened, he released what became FDR’s “Bombshell Message” known as the “bombshell message,” repudiating the orthodox views of most of the delegates and rejecting any agreement on currency stabilization. The conference quickly dissolved. At the same time, Roosevelt abandoned the commitments of the Hoover administration to settle the issue of war debts through international agreement. In April 1934, he signed a bill that prohibited American banks from making loans to any nation in default on its debts. The legislation ended the old, circular system by which debt payments continued only by virtue of increasing American loans. Within months, war-debt payments from every nation except Finland stopped for good. Sixteen years after the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, the American government still had not officially recognized the government of the Soviet Union. But a growing number of influential Americans were urging a change in policy—largely because the Soviet Union appeared to be a possible source of trade. Soviet leader Josef Stalin was hoping for American cooperation in containing Japan. In November 1933, the United States and the Soviet Union agreed to open formal diplomatic exchange. Relations with the Soviet Union, however, soon soured. American trade failed to establish a foothold in Russia, disappointing hopes in the United States. The American government did little to reassure U.S.–Soviet Relations the Soviets that it was interested in stopping Japanese expansion in Asia, dousing expectations in Russia. By the end of 1934, the Soviet Union and the United States were once again viewing each other with considerable mistrust.

THE GLOBAL CRISIS, 1921–1941
• 617 

 The Roosevelt administration was also taking a new approach toward Latin America, an approach that became known as the “Good Neighbor Policy” and “Good Neighbor Policy” that expanded on the changes the Hoover administration had made. At an Inter-American Conference in Montevideo, Uruguay, in December 1933, Secretary of State Cordell Hull signed a formal convention declaring: “No state has the right to intervene in the internal or external affairs of another.”

The Rise of Isolationism
 With the international system of the 1920s now beyond repair, the United States faced a choice between more active efforts to stabilize the world or more energetic attempts to isolate itself from it. Most Americans unhesitatingly chose isolation. Support for isolationism emerged from many quarters. Some Wilsonian internationalists had grown disillusioned with the League of Nations and its inability to stop Japanese aggression in Asia. Other Americans argued that the American role in World War I was a result of Wall Street and munitions makers. An investigation by a Senate committee chaired by Senator Gerald Nye of North Dakota claimed to have produced evidence of exorbitant profiteering and tax evasion by many corporations during the war, and it suggested that bankers had pressured Wilson to intervene in the war so as to protect their loans abroad. (Few historians now lend much credence to these charges.) Roosevelt continued to hope for at least a modest American role in maintaining world peace. In 1935, he proposed to the Senate a treaty to make the United States a member of the World Court—a largely symbolic gesture. Isolationists led by Father Coughlin and William Randolph Hearst aroused popular opposition to the agreement, and the Senate voted it down. In the summer of 1935, Mussolini’s Italy was preparing to invade Ethiopia. Fearing the invasion would provoke a new European war, American legislators tried to prevent the United States from being dragged into the conflict. The Neutrality Act Neutrality Acts of 1935 established a mandatory arms embargo against both sides in any military conflict and warned American citizens against traveling on the ships of warring nations. Thus, isolationists believed, the “protection of neutral rights” could not again become an excuse for American intervention in war. A 1937 law established the so-called cash-and-carry policy, by which warring nations could purchase only nonmilitary goods from the United States and could do so only by paying cash and shipping their purchases themselves. Isolationist sentiment showed its strength again in 1936–1937 in response to the civil war in Spain. The Falangists of General Francisco Franco, a group Spanish Civil War ­somewhat like the Italian fascists, revolted in July 1936 against the existing republican government. Hitler and Mussolini supported Franco, both vocally and with weapons and supplies. Some Americans traveled to Spain to assist the republican cause, but the United States government joined with Britain and France in an agreement to offer no assistance to either side. In the summer of 1937, Japan intensified its six-year-old assault on Manchuria and attacked China’s five northern provinces. In a speech in Chicago in October 1937, Roosevelt warned that Japanese and other aggressors should be “quarantined” by the international community to prevent the contagion of war from spreading. He was deliberately vague about what such a quarantine would mean. Even so, public response to the speech was hostile, and Roosevelt drew back. On December 12, 1937, Japanese aviators bombed and sank the United States gunboat Panay, almost certainly deliberately, as it

618 • CHAPTER 25


THE SPANISH CIVIL WAR
Many Americans took up arms to help the republican forces fight against Franco and his army. The novelist Ernest Hemingway joined them in Spain as a reporter (and supporter of the republicans), and he spent much of his time talking with both American and Spanish troops. His novel For Whom the Bell Tolls was inspired by his experience in the civil war. (Robert Capa/© International Center of Photography/Magnum Photos) 
 sailed the Yangtze River in China. But so reluctant was the Roosevelt administration to antagonize the isolationists that the United States eagerly seized on Japanese claims that the bombing had been an accident, accepted Japan’s apologies, and overlooked the attack.

The Failure of Munich
 In 1936, Hitler had moved the revived German army into the Rhineland, rearming an area that had been off-limits to German troops since World War I. In March 1938, German forces marched without opposition into Austria, and Hitler proclaimed a union (or Anschluss) between Austria, his native land, and Germany, his adopted one. Neither in America nor in most of Europe was there much more than a murmur of opposition. Germany had by now occupied territory surrounding three sides of western Czechoslovakia, a region Hitler dreamed of annexing. In September 1938, he demanded that Czechoslovakia cede him the Sudetenland, a part of Czechoslovakia in which many ethnic Germans lived. Although Czechoslovakia was prepared to fight to stop Hitler, it needed assistance from other nations. But most Western governments, including the United States, were willing to pay almost any price to settle the crisis peacefully. On September 29, Hitler met with the leaders of France and Great Britain at Munich in an effort to resolve the crisis. The French and British agreed to accept the German demands in Czechoslovakia in return for Hitler’s promise to expand no farther. Americans watched these events nervously—and the fear of war became a fixture of domestic

THE GLOBAL CRISIS, 1921–1941
• 619 

 thought and culture. (See “Patterns of Popular Culture: Orson Welles and the ‘War of the Worlds.’ ”) The Munich agreement, which Roosevelt supported at the time, was the most prominent element of a policy that came to be known as appeasement and that came to be identified (not altogether fairly) with British prime minister Neville Chamberlain. Whoever was to blame, the policy was a failure. In March 1939, Hitler occupied the remaining areas of Czechoslovakia, violating the Munich agreement unashamedly. And in April, he began issuing threats against Poland. At that point, both Britain and France assured the Polish government that they would come to its assistance in case of an invasion; they even tried, too late, to draw the Soviet Union into a mutual defense agreement. But the Soviet leader Josef Stalin, who had not even been invited to the Munich Conference, had decided he could expect no protection from the West. He signed a nonaggression pact with Hitler in August 1939, freeing the Germans, for a while, from the danger of a two-front war. Shortly after that, Hitler staged an incident on the Polish border to allow him to claim that Germany had been attacked, and on September 1, 1939, he launched a full-scale invasion of Poland. Invasion of Poland Britain and France, true to their pledges, declared war on Germany two days later. World War II, already under way in Asia, had begun in Europe.

FROM NEUTRALITY TO INTERVENTION
 “This nation will remain a neutral nation,” the president declared shortly after the hostilities began in Europe, “but I cannot ask that every American remain neutral in thought as well.” There was never any question that both he and the majority of the American people favored Britain, France, and the other Allied nations in the contest. The question was how much the United States was prepared to do to assist them.

Neutrality Tested
 At the very least, Roosevelt believed, the United States should make armaments available to the Allied armies to counter the military advantage the large German munitions industry gave Hitler. In September 1939, he asked Congress to revise the Neutrality Acts and lift the arms embargo against any nation engaged in war. Congress maintained the prohibition on American ships entering war zones. But the 1939 law did permit belligerents to purchase arms on the same cash-and-carry basis that the earlier Neutrality Acts had established for the sale of nonmilitary materials. After the German armies quickly subdued Poland, the war in Europe settled into a long, quiet lull that lasted through the winter and spring—a “phony war,” some called it. But in the spring of 1940, Germany launched a massive invasion, known as the “blitzkrieg” (lightning war), to the west—first attacking Denmark and Norway, sweeping The Blitzkrieg next across the Netherlands and Belgium, and driving finally deep into the heart of France. On June 10, Mussolini invaded France from the south as Hitler was attacking from the north. On June 22, France fell, and Nazi troops marched into Paris. A new French regime assembled in Vichy, largely controlled by the German occupiers; and Vichy Regime in France in all of Europe, only the shattered remnants of the British and French armies—daringly rescued from the beaches of Dunkirk by a hastily organized armada of English boats, trawlers, and yachts—remained to oppose the Axis forces.

PATTERNS OF POPULAR CULTURE


Orson Welles and the
“War of the Worlds”
 On the evening of October 30, 1938, about 6 million Americans were listening to the weekly radio program The Mercury Theatre on the Air, produced by the actor/filmmaker Orson Welles and broadcast over the CBS network. A few minutes into the show, an announcer interrupted some dance music with a terrifying report: At least forty people, including six state troopers, lie dead in a field east of Grover’s Mill [New Jersey], their bodies burned and distorted beyond recognition. . . . Good heavens, something’s wriggling out of the shadow like a gray snake! Now it’s another one and another. . . . It’s large as a bear and

 it glistens like black leather. But that face . . . it’s indescribable! I can hardly force myself to keep looking at it. The panicky announcer was describing the beginning of an alien invasion of earth and the appearance of Martians armed with “death rays,” determined to destroy the planet. Later in the evening, an announcer claiming to be broadcasting from Times Square r­ eported the destruction of New York City before falling dead at the microphone. The dramatic “news bulletins” were part of a radio play by Howard Koch, loosely adapted from H. G. Wells’s 1898 novel, The War of the Worlds. Announcers reminded the audience repeatedly throughout the broadcast that

WELLES ON THE AIR
Welles (top right) is shown here during the broadcast of the “War of the Worlds” in 1938. Although announcers told listeners throughout the broadcast that it was fiction, Welles came under intense criticism in following days for the panic it caused among many listeners. (© Bettmann/Corbis) 
620 •


 they were listening to a play, but many people either did not hear or did not notice the disclaimers. By the end of the hour, according to some estimates, as many as a million Americans were flying into panics, convinced that the end of the world was imminent. Thousands of listeners in New York and New Jersey fled their homes and tried to drive along clogged highways into the hills or the countryside. In Newark, people ran from their buildings with wet towels wrapped around their faces or wearing gas masks—as if ­defending themselves against the chemical warfare that many remembered from the trenches in World War I. In cities across the country, people flocked into churches to pray; called police and hospitals for help; flooded the switchboards of newspapers, magazines, and radio stations desperate for information. “I never hugged my radio so closely as I did last night,” one woman later explained. “I held a crucifix in my hand and prayed while looking out of my open window for falling meteors.” The New York Times described it the next day as “a wave of mass hysteria.” For weeks thereafter, Orson Welles and other producers of the show were the focus of a barrage of criticism for what many Americans believed had been a deliberate effort to create public fear. For years, sociologists and other scholars studied the episode for clues about mass behavior. Welles and his colleagues claimed to be surprised by the reaction their show created. The broadcast proved more effective than they had expected because it touched on anxieties that ran deep in American life at the time. The show aired only a few weeks after the war fever that had preceded the Munich pact among Germany, Britain, and France; Americans already jittery about the possibility of war proved easy prey to fears of another kind of invasion. The show also tapped longer-standing anxieties about the fragility of life that afflicted many Americans during the long depression of the 1930s, and it seemed to frighten working-class people—those most vulnerable to unexpected catastrophes—in particular.

 Most of all, however, the “War of the Worlds” unintentionally exploited the enormous power that radio had come to exercise in American life, and the great trust many people had developed in what they heard over the air. For many people, the broadcasts they received over the radio had become their principal, even their only, source of information about the outside world. When the actors from The Mercury Theatre began to use the familiar phrases and cadences of radio news announcers, it was easy for members of their audience to assume that they were hearing the truth. Welles concluded the broadcast by describing the play as “the Mercury Theater’s own ­radio version of dressing up in a sheet and jumping out of a bush and saying Boo! . . . So goodbye everybody, and remember, please, for the next day or so, the terrible lesson you learned tonight. The grinning, glowing, globular invader of your living room is an inhabitant of the pumpkin patch, and if your doorbell rings and there’s no one there, that was no Martian . . . it’s Halloween.” But the real lesson of the “War of the Worlds” was the lesson of the enormous, and at times frightening, power of the medium of broadcasting.

•


From War of the Worlds by Howard Koch.
Copyright © 1938 Howard Koch.
UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. Why did Welles’s “War of the Worlds”

 broadcast create so much panic and hysteria? 2. What responsibility did Welles and his producers bear for the hysteria that followed the program? Could they have done more to prevent that hysteria and reassure their audience? If so, should they have done more? 3. Do the media today hold as much power and influence as radio did in the 1930s? Would an audience today be as likely to ­react with panic and hysteria to a broadcast similar to that of the “War of the Worlds”? • 621

622 • CHAPTER 25


THE BLITZ, LONDON
The German Luftwaffe terrorized London and other British cities in 1940–1941 and again late in the war by bombing civilian areas indiscriminately in an effort to break the spirit of the English people. The effort failed, and the fortitude of the British did much to arouse American support for their cause. St. Paul’s Cathedral, largely undamaged throughout the raids, looms in the background of this photograph, as other buildings crumble under the force of German bombs. (© Daily Mail/Rex/Alamy) 
 On May 16, in the midst of the offensive, Roosevelt asked Congress for and quickly received an additional $1 billion for defense. That was one day after Winston Churchill, Aid to Churchill the new British prime minister, had sent Roosevelt the first of many long lists of requests for armaments, without which, he insisted, England could not long survive. Some Americans (including the ambassador to London, Joseph P. Kennedy) argued that the British plight was already hopeless, that any aid to the English was a wasted effort. But the president was determined to make war materials available to Britain. Roosevelt even circumvented the cash-and-carry provisions of the Neutrality Acts by ­giving England fifty American destroyers (most of them left over from World War I) in return for the right to build American bases on British territory in the Caribbean. He also returned to the factories a number of new airplanes purchased by the American military so that the British could buy them instead. Roosevelt was able to take such steps in part because of a major shift in American public opinion. By July 1940, more than 66 percent of the public (according to opinion polls) believed that Germany posed a direct threat to the United States. As a result, Congress was more willing to permit expanded American assistance to the Allies. Congress was also becoming more concerned about the need for preparations for war, and in Peacetime Draft September it approved the Burke-Wadsworth Act, inaugurating the first peacetime military draft in American history. But a powerful new isolationist lobby—the America First Committee, whose members included such prominent Americans as Charles Lindbergh and Senators Gerald Nye and

THE GLOBAL CRISIS, 1921–1941
• 623 

 Burton Wheeler—joined the debate over American policy toward the war. The lobby had at least the indirect support of a large proportion of the Republican Party. Through the summer and fall of 1940, the debate was complicated by a presidential campaign.

The Campaign of 1940
 The biggest political question of 1940 was whether Franklin Roosevelt would break with tradition and run for an unprecedented third term. The president himself did not reveal his own wishes. But by refusing to withdraw from the contest, he made it impossible for any rival Democrat to establish a claim to the nomination. And when, just before the Democratic National Convention in July, he let it be known that he would accept a “draft” from his party, the issue was virtually settled. The Democrats quickly renominated him and even reluctantly swallowed his choice for vice president: Agriculture Secretary Henry A. Wallace, a man too liberal and too controversial for the taste of many party leaders. The Republicans nominated for president a politically inexperienced Indiana businessman, Wendell Willkie, who benefited from a powerful grassroots movement—as well as strong support from the Luce magazines—especially Time and Life. The Republicans took positions little different from Roosevelt’s: they would keep the country out FDR Reelected of war but would extend generous assistance to the Allies. Willkie was an appealing figure and a vigorous campaigner, and he managed to evoke more public enthusiasm than any Republican candidate in decades. But Roosevelt still won decisively. He received 55 percent of the popular vote to Willkie’s 45 percent, and he won 449 electoral votes to Willkie’s 82.

Neutrality Abandoned
 In the last months of 1940, Roosevelt began to make subtle changes in the American role in the war. Great Britain was virtually bankrupt and could no longer meet the cash-andcarry requirements imposed by the Neutrality Acts. The president therefore, “Lend-Lease” proposed a new system for supplying Britain: “lend-lease.” It would allow the federal government not only to sell but also to lend or lease armaments to any nation deemed “pivotal to the defense of the United States.” In other words, America could funnel weapons to England on the basis of no more than Britain’s promise to return them when the war was over. Congress enacted the bill by wide margins in March 1941. Attacks by German submarines had made shipping lanes in the Atlantic extremely dangerous. The British navy was losing ships more rapidly than it could replace them and was finding it difficult to transport materials across the Atlantic from America. Roosevelt argued that the western Atlantic was a neutral zone and the responsibility of the American nations. By July 1941, therefore, American ships were patrolling the ocean as far east as Iceland. At first, Germany did little to challenge these obviously hostile American actions. By September 1941, however, the situation had changed. Nazi forces had invaded the Soviet Union in June of that year. When the Soviets did not surrender, as many had predicted they would, Roosevelt persuaded Congress to extend lend-lease privileges to them. Now American industry was providing vital assistance to Hitler’s foes on two fronts, and the American navy was protecting the flow of those goods to Europe. In September, Nazi submarines began a concerted torpedo campaign against American vessels. Roosevelt ordered American ships to fire on German submarines “on sight.” In October, Nazi submarines hit two American destroyers and sank one of them, the Reuben James, killing many

CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
JOINT STATEMENT BY PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT
AND PRIME MINISTER CHURCHILL
In August 1941, Franklin Roosevelt and
 Winston Churchill met aboard a British vessel off the coast of Newfoundland. The president made no military commitments, but he did join with the prime minister in releasing a document that became known as the Atlantic Charter. The two nations called for a new world order based on selfdetermination, economic cooperation, and antimilitarism. The President of the United States and the Prime Minister, Mr. Churchill, representing His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom, have met at sea. [. . .] They have considered the dangers to world civilization arising from the policies of military domination by conquest upon which the Hitlerite government of Germany and other governments associated therewith have embarked, and have made clear the stress which their countries are respectively taking for their safety in the face of these dangers. They have agreed upon the following joint declaration: Joint declaration of the President of the United States of America and the Prime Minister, Mr. Churchill, representing His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom, being met together, deem it right to make known certain common principles in the ­national policies of their respective countries on which they base their hopes for a better future for the world. First, their countries seek no aggrandizement, territorial or other; Second, they desire to see no territorial changes that do not accord with the freely expressed wishes of the peoples concerned; Third, they respect the right of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they will live; and they wish to see 624 •

 sovereign rights and self-government ­restored to those who have been forcibly deprived of them; Fourth, they will endeavor, with due ­respect for their existing obligations, to further the enjoyment by all States, great or small, victor or vanquished, of access, on equal terms, to the trade and to the raw ­materials of the world which are needed for their economic prosperity; Fifth, they desire to bring about the fullest collaboration between all nations in the economic field with the objector securing, for all, improved labor standards, economic advancement and social security; Sixth, after the final destruction of the Nazi tyranny, they hope to see established a peace which will afford to all nations the means of dwelling in safety within their own boundaries, and which will afford ­assurance that all the men in all the lands may live out their lives in freedom from fear and want; Seventh, such a peace should enable all men to traverse the high seas and oceans without hindrance; Eighth, they believe that all of the n ­ ations of the world, for realistic as well as spiritual reasons must come to the abandonment of the use of force. Since no future peace can be maintained if land, sea or air armaments continue to be employed by nations which threaten, or may threaten, aggression outside of their frontiers, they believe, pending the establishment of a wider and permanent system of general security, that the disarmament of such nations is essential. They will likewise aid and encourage all other practicable measures which will lighten for peace-loving peoples the crushing burden of armaments. FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT WINSTON S. CHURCHILL

UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. What inspired this meeting between the

United States and Great Britain in the
 Atlantic? What goals did the two ­nations set for future international ­diplomacy and the rights of nations?

 2. Which mutual goals reflect the shared

 experience of the Great Depression? Which reflect the shared experience of World War I? Source: The Atlantic Charter, published in Department of State Executive Agreement Series No. 236.

 American sailors. Congress quickly voted to allow the United States to arm its merchant vessels and to sail all the way into belligerent ports. The United States The Atlantic Charter had, in effect, launched a naval war against Germany. Meanwhile, Roosevelt had met recently with Churchill to issue a statement of shared goals known as the Atlantic Charter. (See “Consider the Source: Joint Statement by President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill.”)

The Road to Pearl Harbor
 Japan, in the meantime, was still extending its empire in the Pacific. In September 1940, the Japanese signed the Tripartite Pact, a loose defensive alliance with Germany and Italy (although in reality, the European Axis powers never developed a very strong relationship with Japan). In July 1941, Japanese troops moved into Indochina and seized the capital of Vietnam, a colony of France. The United States, having broken Japanese codes, knew Japan’s next target was to be the oil-rich Dutch East Indies; and when Tokyo failed to respond to Roosevelt’s stern warnings, the president froze all Japanese assets in the United States, severely limiting Japan’s ability to purchase needed American supplies. Tokyo now faced a choice. Either it would have to repair relations with the United States to restore the flow of oil and other supplies, or it would have to find those supplies elsewhere, most notably by seizing British and Dutch possessions in Hideki Tojo in Power the Pacific. In October, militants in Tokyo forced the moderate prime minister out of office and replaced him with the leader of the war party, General Hideki Tojo. By late November, the State Department had given up on the possibility of a peaceful settlement. American intelligence had decoded Japanese messages that made clear a Japanese attack was imminent. But Washington did not know where the attack would take place. Most officials continued to believe that the Japanese would not move first against American territory but against British or Dutch possessions to the south. A combination of confusion, miscalculation, and underestimation of the Japanese military caused the government to overlook indications that Japan intended a direct attack on American forces. At 7:55 a.m. on Sunday, December 7, 1941, a wave of Japanese bombers attacked the United States naval base at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii—part of a coordinated pattern of attacks against American and British holdings in Asia. A second wave came an hour later. Within two hours, the United States lost 8 battleships, 3 cruisers, Pearl Harbor Attacked 4 other vessels, 188 airplanes, and several vital shore installations. More than 2,400 soldiers and sailors died, and another 1,000 were injured. The Japanese suffered only light losses. American forces were now greatly diminished in the Pacific (although by a fortunate accident, no American aircraft carriers—the heart of the Pacific Fleet—had been at Pearl Harbor on December 7). Nevertheless, the raid on Hawaii unified the American people behind war. On December 8, after a stirring speech by the president, the Senate voted • 625

626 • CHAPTER 25


PEARL HARBOR, DECEMBER 7, 1941
At least seven aerial torpedoes and two bombs struck the battleship USS West Virginia on that fateful morning. Repair workers discovered 66 bodies of West Virginia crewmembers. After it was restored to fighting condition, the ship reentered the war and participated in the Battles of Iwo Jima and Okinawa. (© GL Archive/Alamy) 
 unanimously and the House voted 388 to 1 to approve a declaration of war against Japan. Three days later, Germany and Italy, Japan’s European allies, declared war on the United States; on the same day, December 11, Congress reciprocated without a dissenting vote.

CONCLUSION
 American foreign policy in the years after World War I attempted something that ultimately proved impossible. Americans were determined to be a major power in the world. They were determined to extend the nation’s trade broadly around the globe. And they were determined to influence other nations in ways that would be beneficial to America’s, and the world’s, interests. The United States was also determined to do nothing that would limit its own freedom of action. It would not join the League of Nations. It would not join the World Court. It would not form alliances with other nations. It would operate powerfully—and alone. But ominous forces were at work in the world that would gradually push the United States into greater engagement with other nations. The economic disarray that the Great Depression created around the globe, the rise of totalitarian regimes, the expansionist ambitions of powerful new leaders—all worked to destroy the uneasy stability of the post–World War I international system. America’s own interests, economic and otherwise,

THE GLOBAL CRISIS, 1921–1941
• 627 

 were now imperiled. And America’s go-it-alone foreign policy seemed powerless to change the course of events. Franklin Roosevelt tried throughout the later years of the 1930s to push the American people slowly into a greater involvement in international affairs. In particular, he tried to nudge the United States toward taking a more forceful stand against dictatorship and aggression. A powerful isolationist movement helped stymie him for a time, even after war broke out in Europe. Gradually, however, public opinion shifted toward support of the Allies (Britain, France, and the Soviet Union) and against the Axis (Germany, Italy, and Japan). The nation began to mobilize for war, to supply ships and munitions to Britain, even to engage in naval combat with German forces in the Atlantic. Finally, on December 7, 1941, the surprise Japanese attack on the American base at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii eliminated the last elements of uncertainty and drove the United States—now united behind the war effort—into the greatest and most terrible conflict in human history.

KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
Adolf Hitler 615
 appeasement 619 Atlantic Charter 624 Benito Mussolini 613 Dawes Plan 613 fascism 613

Good Neighbor Policy 617
Hideki Tojo 625
 isolationism 617 Josef Stalin 616 lend-lease 623 Nazi Party 615

Neutrality Acts 617
Pearl Harbor 625
Sino-Japanese War 614
Spanish Civil War 617
 Vichy regime 619 Winston Churchill 622

RECALL AND REFLECT
 1. 	What diplomatic efforts and agreements of the 1920s and 1930s attempted to deal with

 the increasing global political crises of the era? Why were these efforts ­unsuccessful? 2. 	How did the goals of the Neutrality Acts change over the course of the 1930s? What was

 the reason for the change? 3. 	Why did Japan attack Pearl Harbor?



AMERICA IN A
WORLD AT WAR
WAR ON TWO FRONTS
THE AMERICAN ECONOMY IN WARTIME
RACE AND ETHNICITY IN WARTIME AMERICA
ANXIETY AND AFFLUENCE IN WARTIME CULTURE
THE DEFEAT OF THE AXIS


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. What was the impact of the war on the U.S. economy? 2. How was the military experience of the United States in World War II different in Europe and the Pacific? 3. How did the war affect life on the home front, especially for women, organized labor, and minorities?

THE ATTACK ON PEARL HARBOR
thrust the United States into the greatest and most terrible war in the history of humanity, a war that changed the world as dramatically as any event of the twentieth century. World War II also transformed the United States in profound, if not always readily visible, ways. The war forced the American people to accept an unprecedented level of government control over their everyday lives. It transformed the roles of many women, reshaped the nation’s industrial landscape, and thrust the United States into a position of global leadership that it has maintained ever since. 
628 •


WAR ON TWO FRONTS


TIME LINE


 Whatever political disagreements and social tensions there may have been among the American people during World War II, there was striking unity of opinion about the conflict itself. But both unity and confidence faced severe tests in the first, troubled months of 1942.

Containing the Japanese
 Ten hours after the strike at Pearl Harbor, Japanese airplanes attacked the American airfields at Manila in the Philippines, destroying much of America’s remaining air power in the Pacific. Three days later, Guam, an American possession, fell. Wake Island and Hong Kong followed. The great British fortress of Singapore in Malaya surrendered in February 1942, the Dutch East Indies in March, and Burma in April. In the Philippines, exhausted Filipino and American troops gave up their defense of the islands on May 6. (The American commander, General Douglas MacArthur, vowed as he left, “I shall return.”) American strategists planned two broad offensives to turn the tide against the Japanese. One, under the command of MacArthur, would move north from Australia, through New Guinea, and eventually to the Philippines. The other, under Admiral Chester Nimitz, would move west from Hawaii toward major Japanese island outposts in the central Pacific. Ultimately, strategists predicted, the two offensives would come together to invade Japan itself. The Allies achieved their first important victory in the Battle of the Coral Sea, just northeast of Australia, on May 7–8, 1942, when American forces turned back the previously unstoppable Japanese navy. An even more important turning point occurred a month later northwest of Hawaii, near the small American outpost at Midway Island. There, after an enormous four-day battle (June 3–6, 1942), the American navy, despite

Battle of Midway
Campaign in North
Africa
Japanese Americans
 interned Manhattan Project begins

 CORE founded

 Americans capture Guadalcanal Allied invasion of Italy Soviet victory at Stalingrad Allies invade Normandy Roosevelt reelected Americans capture Philippines

 Roosevelt dies; Truman becomes president Germany surrenders U.S. drops atomic bombs on Hiroshima, Nagasaki Japan surrenders

• 629


