740 • CHAPTER 30


 In the summer of 1969, more than 400,000 people gathered for a music festival on a farm near Woodstock, New York. The gathering became a symbol of the youth movement of the sixties. (© Shelly Rustin/ Black Star) WOODSTOCK

 to themes of anger, frustration, and rebellion. Many popular musicians used their music to express explicit political radicalism as well—especially some of the leading folk singers of the era, such as Bob Dylan and Joan Baez. Rock’s driving rhythms, its undisguised sensuality, its often harsh and angry tone—all made it an appropriate vehicle for expressing the themes of the social and political unrest of the late 1960s. A powerful symbol of the fusion of rock music and the counterculture was the massive Woodstock music festival at Woodstock, New York, in the summer of 1969, where 400,000 people gathered on a farm for nearly a week. Despite heavy rain, mud, inadequate facilities, and impossible crowding, the attendees remained peaceful and harmonious. Champions of the counterculture spoke rhapsodically at the time of how Woodstock represented the birth of a new youth culture, the “Woodstock nation.” Four months later, however, another large rock concert—at the Altamont racetrack near San Francisco, featuring the Rolling Stones and attended by 300,000 people—exposed a darker side of the youth culture. Altamont became a brutal and violent event at which four people died, several accidentally or from drug overdoses but one because of injuries inflicted by members of a Hells Angels motorcycle gang, who were serving as security guards at the concert and who brutally beat and stabbed a number of people.

THE MOBILIZATION OF MINORITIES
 The growth of African American protest encouraged other minorities to assert themselves and demand redress of their grievances. For Indians, Hispanic Americans, gay men and lesbians, and others, the late 1960s and 1970s were a time of growing self-expression and political activism.

THE CRISIS OF AUTHORITY
• 741 

Seeds of Indian Militancy
 Few minorities had deeper or more justifiable grievances against the prevailing culture than did American Indians—or Native Americans, as they began defiantly to call themselves in the 1960s. Indians were the least prosperous, least healthy, and least stable ethnic group in the nation. And while African Americans attracted the attention (for good or for ill) of many whites, Indians for years had remained largely ignored. For much of the postwar era, federal tribal policies tried to incorporate Indians into mainstream American society whether Indians wanted to assimilate or not. Two laws passed in 1953 established the basis of this policy, which became known Termination Policy as “termination.” Through termination, the federal government withdrew all official recognition of the tribes as legal entities; they were no longer administratively separate from state governments and were subject to the same local jurisdictions as non–Native American residents. At the same time, the government encouraged Indians to assimilate into the white world and worked to funnel Native Americans into cities, where, presumably, they would adapt themselves to the larger society and lose their cultural distinctiveness. Despite some individual successes, the new policies were a disastrous failure on the whole. Indians themselves fought so bitterly against these policies that in 1958, the Eisenhower administration barred further terminations. In the meantime, the struggle against termination mobilized a new generation of Indian militants and breathed life into the principal Native American organization, the National Congress of American Indians, which had been created in 1944. The Democratic administrations of the 1960s made no effort to revive termination. Instead, they made modest efforts to restore at least some degree of tribal autonomy such as funneling Office of Economic Opportunity money to tribal organizations through the Community Action programs. In the meantime, the tribes themselves began to fight for greater self-determination. The new militancy benefited from the rapid increase in the Indian population, which was growing much faster than that of the rest of the nation (nearly doubling between 1950 and 1970 to a total of about 800,000).

The Indian Civil Rights Movement
 In 1961, more than 400 members from 67 tribes gathered in Chicago and issued the Declaration of Indian Purpose, which stressed the “right to choose our own way of life” and the “responsibility of preserving our precious heritage.” Another example of a ­growing Indian self-consciousness, the National Indian Youth Council, created in the aftermath of the 1961 Chicago meeting, promoted the idea of Indian nationalism and intertribal unity. In 1968, a group of young, militant Indians established the American Indian Movement (AIM), which drew support from urban areas American Indian Movement and reservations alike. The new activism produced results. In 1968, Congress passed the Indian Civil Rights Act. It guaranteed reservation Indians protections by the Bill of Rights, Indian Civil Rights Act but also recognized the legitimacy of tribal laws within the reservations. In 1968, Indian fishermen, citing old treaty rights, clashed with Washington State officials on the Columbia River and in Puget Sound. The following year, members of several tribes occupied the abandoned federal prison on Alcatraz Island in San Francisco Bay, claiming the site “by right of discovery.” In response, the Nixon administration appointed Louis Bruce, a Mohawk-Sioux, as commissioner of Indian affairs in 1969; and in 1970, the president promised both

742 • CHAPTER 30


THE OCCUPATION OF ALCATRAZ
Alcatraz, an island in San Francisco Bay, once housed a large federal prison that by the late 1960s had been abandoned. In 1969, a group of Indian activists occupied the island and claimed it as Indian land—precipitating a long standoff with authorities. (© AP Images) 
 increased tribal self-determination and an increase in federal aid. But the protests continued. In November 1972, nearly a thousand demonstrators, most of them Lakota Sioux, forcibly occupied the building of the Bureau of Indian Affairs in Washington, D.C., for six days. In February 1973, members of AIM seized the town of Wounded Knee, South Dakota, the site of the 1890 massacre of Sioux by federal troops. For two months, they occupied the town, demanding that the government honor its long-forgotten treaty obligations. The Indian civil rights movement, like other civil rights movements of the same time, fell far short of winning full equality for Native Americans. But it helped the tribes win a series of new legal rights and protections that, together, gave them a stronger position than they had enjoyed at any previous time in the twentieth century.

Latino Activism
 The fastest-growing minority group in the United States in the 1970s was Latinos, or Hispanic Americans. Large numbers of Mexicans had entered the country during World War II in response to the wartime labor shortage, and many had remained in the cities of the Southwest and the Pacific Coast. By 1960, Los Angeles had a bigger Mexican population than any place except Mexico City. But the greatest expansion in the Latino population of the United States was yet to Growing Latino Population come. In 1960, the census reported slightly more than 3 million Latinos living in the United States. By 1970, that number had grown to 9 million and by 2000 to 35 million. By 2010, the number passed 50 million. Hispanics constituted more than a third of all legal immigrants to the United States after 1960.

THE CRISIS OF AUTHORITY
• 743 

 Large numbers of Puerto Ricans (who were entitled to American citizenship by birth) migrated to eastern urban areas, particularly New York City, where they formed one of the poorest communities in the city. South Florida’s substantial Cuban population began with a wave of middle-class refugees fleeing the Castro regime in the early 1960s. These first Cuban migrants quickly established themselves as a successful and highly assimilated part of Miami’s middle class. In 1980, a second, much poorer wave of Cuban immigrants—the so-called Marielitos, named for the port from which they left Cuba—arrived in Florida when Castro temporarily relaxed exit restrictions. Later in the 1980s, large numbers of immigrants (both legal and illegal) began to arrive from Central and South America—from Guatemala, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Peru, and other countries. Like African Americans and Indians, many Latinos responded to the highly charged climate of the 1960s by strengthening their ethnic identification and by organizing for political and economic power. Affluent Hispanics in Miami filled influential positions in the professions and local government; in the Southwest, Latino voters elected Mexican Americans to seats in Congress and to governorships. A Mexican American political organization, La Raza Unida, exercised influence in Southern California and elsewhere in the Southwest in the 1970s and beyond. One of the most visible efforts to organize Hispanics occurred in California, where an Arizona-born farmworker of Mexican descent, César Chávez, created an effective César Chávez union of largely Mexican itinerant ­farmworkers: the United Farm Workers (UFW). For most Latinos, however, the path to economic and political power was more difficult. Mexican Americans and others were slow to develop political influence in proportion to their numbers. In the meantime, Latinos formed one of the poorest segments of the United States population.

KENNEDY AND CHÁVEZ
César Chávez, leader of the United Farm Workers, endured a hunger strike in 1968 in the spirit of nonviolent protest against the treatment of field workers. Robert F. Kennedy, just beginning his campaign for the presidency, visited the union leader to show his support. At this point, Chávez had been fasting for several weeks. (Photo by Michael Rougier/© Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images) 
744 • CHAPTER 30


Gay Liberation
 Another important liberation movement to emerge in the 1960s was the effort by gay men and lesbians to win political and economic rights and social acceptance. Homosexuality has been a generally unacknowledged reality throughout Western civilization. Nonheterosexual men and women were forced for generations to suppress their sexual preferences, to exercise them surreptitiously, or to live within isolated and often persecuted communities. But by the late 1960s, the liberating impulses that had affected other groups helped mobilize gay men and lesbians to fight for their own rights. On June 27, 1969, police officers raided the Stonewall Inn, a gay nightclub in New York City’s Greenwich Village, and began arresting patrons simply for frequenting the place. The raid was not unusual, but the response was. Gay onlookers taunted the police and then attacked them. Someone started a blaze in the Stonewall Inn itself, almost trapping the police inside. Rioting continued throughout Greenwich Village (the center of New York’s gay community) through much of the night. The “Stonewall Riot” marked the growth of the gay liberation movement—one of the Stonewall Riot most controversial challenges to traditional values and assumptions of its time. New organizations—among them the Gay Liberation Front, founded in New York in 1969—sprang up around the country. Public discussion and media coverage of homosexuality, long subject to an unofficial taboo, quickly and dramatically increased. Gay activists had some success in challenging the long-standing assumption that homosexuality was aberrant behavior; many argued that no sexual preference was any more normal than another. One victory came when the American Psychiatric Association stopped ­categorizing homosexuality as a mental illness in 1974. Most of all, however, the gay liberation movement transformed the outlook of many gay men and lesbians themselves. It helped them “come out,” express their preferences openly and unapologetically, and demand from society a recognition that gay relationships could be as significant and worthy of respect as heterosexual ones. By the early 1980s, the gay liberation movement had made remarkable strides. Even the ravages of the AIDS epidemic, which, in the beginning at least, affected the gay community more disastrously than any other group, failed to halt the growth of gay liberation. Indeed, it not only strengthened the gay community, but it also helped Americans understand and humanize those suffering, which in turn slowly led to increased acceptance. By the early twenty-first century, gay men and lesbians had achieved many of the same milestones that other oppressed minorities had attained in earlier decades. Openly gay politicians won election to public office. Universities established gay and lesbian studies programs. Laws prohibiting discrimination on the basis of sexual preference made slow, halting progress at the state and local levels. But gay liberation produced a powerful Backlash against Gay Liberation backlash as well. President Bill Clinton’s 1993 effort to end the ban on gay men and lesbians serving in the military met a storm of criticism from members of Congress and within the military itself. Clinton retreated to a “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” policy and even signed the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA) in 1996 that allowed states to refuse to recognize same-sex marriages granted under the laws of other states. Conservative voters in some cities and states approved referendum questions on their ballots outlawing civil rights protections for gay men and lesbians, and, during a bitter debate over gay rights in the 2004 presidential campaign, voted state bans on gay marriage. Antigay violence continued periodically in communities around the country.

THE CRISIS OF AUTHORITY
• 745 

 At the same time, however, support for gay rights grew stronger in many parts of the ­country. In 2010, President Obama and the Congress repealed the “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” policy that forced people in the military to hide their homosexuality. And in June 2015, the Supreme Court affirmed the right of same-sex couples to wed in all 50 states.

THE NEW FEMINISM
 Women constitute over 50 percent of the United States population. But during the 1960s and 1970s, many women began to identify with minority groups as they renewed demands for a liberation of their own.

The Rebirth
 The 1963 publication of Betty Friedan’s The Feminine Mystique is often cited as one of the first events of contemporary women’s liberation. A writer for women’s Betty Friedan magazines in the 1950s, Friedan traveled around the country interviewing women who had graduated with her from Smith College in 1947. Most of these women were living out the dream that postwar American society had promised them: they were affluent wives and mothers living in comfortable suburbs. And yet many of them were deeply frustrated and unhappy, with no outlets for their intelligence, talent, and education. Friedan’s book did not so much cause the revival of feminism as help give voice to a movement that was already stirring. By the time The Feminine Mystique appeared, President Kennedy had already established the President’s Commission on the Status of Women, which brought national

 Earnings in 2009 dollars (rounded to nearest $100)

$60,000
$50,000


Men


$47,100


Women


$36,300


$40,000
$30,000
$20,000


$34,000


$20,600


$10,000
$0
















 Note: People 15 years old and older beginning in 1980 and people 14 years old and older as of the following year for previous years. Before 1989, data are for civilian workers only.

U.S.
Census Bureau data comparing the median earnings of full-time, year-round workers show changes in the gender wage gap over time. • If the Equal Pay Act barred employers from paying women less than men for the same work, what factors might account for the differences in median earnings of men and women? (U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, 1961 to 2009 Annual Social and Economic Supplements) MEDIAN EARNINGS BY GENDER, 1960–2009 
746 • CHAPTER 30


 attention to sexual discrimination. Also in 1963, the Kennedy administration helped win passage of the Equal Pay Act, which barred the pervasive practice of paying women less than men for the same work in some fields. A year later, Congress incorporated into the Civil Rights Act of 1964 an amendment—Title VII—that extended to women many of the same legal protections against discrimination that were being extended to African Americans and other minorities. In 1966, Friedan joined with other feminists to create the National Organization for NOW Women (NOW), which was to become the nation’s largest and most influential feminist organization. NOW responded to the complaints of women by demanding greater educational opportunities for women and denouncing the domestic ideal and the traditional concept of marriage. But the heart of the movement was an effort to address the needs of women in the workplace.

 Women’s Liberation By the late 1960s, new and more radical feminist demands were also attracting a large following, especially among younger, white, educated women. Many of them drew inspiration from the New Left and the counterculture. Some were involved in the civil rights movement; others, in the antiwar crusade. Many had found that even within those movements, they faced discrimination and exclusion and were subordinated to male leaders. In its most radical form, the new feminism rejected the whole notion of marriage, family, and even heterosexual relationships (a vehicle, some women claimed, of male domination). Few women embraced such extremes. But by the early 1970s, large numbers of women were coming to see themselves as an exploited group banding together against oppression and developing a culture of their own. In cities and towns across the country, feminists opened women’s bookstores, bars, and coffee shops. They founded feminist newspapers and magazines. They created women’s health clinics, centers to assist victims of rape and abuse, day-care centers, and, particularly after 1973, abortion clinics.

Expanding Achievements
 In 1971, the government extended its affirmative action guidelines to include women— linking sexism with racism as an officially acknowledged social problem. Women made rapid progress, in the meantime, in their efforts to move into the economic and political mainstream. The nation’s all-male educational institutions began to crack open their doors to women. (Princeton and Yale did so in 1969, and many others soon did the same.) In 1972, Congress approved legislation (known as Title IX) requiring universities to support male and female athletic programs at equal levels. Women were also becoming an important force in business and the professions. Nearly half of all married women held jobs by the mid-1970s, and almost 90 percent of all women with college degrees worked. The two-career family, in which both the husband and the wife maintained active professional lives, slowly became a widely accepted middle-class norm. (It had been common within much of the working class for decades.) There were also important symbolic changes, such as the refusal of many women to adopt their husbands’ surnames when they married and the use of the term “Ms.” in place of “Mrs.” or “Miss” to signal the irrelevance of a woman’s marital status in the professional world. By the mid-1980s, women were serving in both houses of Congress, on the Supreme Court, in numerous federal cabinet positions, as governors of several states, and in many

THE CRISIS OF AUTHORITY
• 747 

 other political positions. In 1981, Ronald Reagan named the first female Supreme Court justice, Sandra Day O’Connor; in 1993, Bill Clinton named the second, Ruth Bader Ginsburg. In 1984, the Democratic Party chose a woman, Representative Women in Government Geraldine Ferraro of New York, as its vice presidential candidate. Madeleine Albright (under Clinton) and Condoleezza Rice (under George W. Bush) became the first women to serve as secretary of state. And in 2008, Hillary Clinton nearly became the Democratic candidate for president. She, too, became secretary of state in the Obama administration. In academia, women were expanding their presence in traditional scholarly fields; they were also creating new fields—women’s and gender studies, which in the 1980s and 1990s were among the fastest-growing areas of American scholarship. In 1972, Congress approved the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) to the Constitution and sent it to the states. For a while, ratification seemed almost The Equal Rights Amendment certain. By the late 1970s, however, the momentum behind the amendment had died because of a rising chorus of objections to it from people (including many antifeminist women) who feared that it would disrupt traditional social patterns. In 1982, the ten years allotted for ratification expired.

The Abortion Issue
 A major goal of American feminism since the 1920s has been the effort by women to win greater control of their own sexual and reproductive lives. In its least controversial form, this impulse helped produce an increasing awareness beginning in the 1970s of the problems of rape, sexual abuse, and domestic abuse. The dissemination of contraceptives and birth-control information became more widespread and less controversial than it had been earlier in the century. A related issue, however, stimulated as much popular controversy as any question of its time: abortion. Abortion had once been legal in much of the United States, but by the beginning of the twentieth century, it was banned by statute in most of the country and remained so into the 1960s (although many abortions continued to be performed quietly, and often dangerously, out of sight of the law). The women’s movement created strong new pressures for the legalization of abortion. Several states had abandoned restrictions on abortion by the end of the 1960s. And in 1973, the Supreme Court’s decision in Roe v. Wade Roe v. Wade, based on an implied but not specified “right to privacy” first protected by the Court only a few years earlier in Griswold v. Connecticut, invalidated all laws prohibiting abortion during the “first trimester”—the first three months of pregnancy. But even then, the issue remained far from settled.

ENVIRONMENTALISM
IN A TURBULENT SOCIETY
 Like feminism, environmentalism entered the 1960s with a long history but relatively little public support. Also like feminism, environmentalism profited from the turbulence of the era and emerged by the 1970s as a powerful force in American life. The rise of this new movement was in part a result of the intensifying level of environmental degradation in advanced industrial societies of the late twentieth century. It was a result, too, of the growth of ecology, a science that provided environmentalists with new and powerful arguments.

748 • CHAPTER 30


The New Science of Ecology
 Until the mid-twentieth century, most people who considered themselves environmentalists based their commitment on aesthetic or moral grounds. They wanted to preserve nature because it was too beautiful to despoil, because it was a mark of divinity on the world, or because it permitted humans a spiritual experience that would otherwise be unavailable to them. Other groups took their cue from the late President Theodore Roosevelt. These conservationists wanted to protect the environment for use in outdoor activities like camping and hunting. In the course of the twentieth century, however, scientists in much of the world began to create a new rationale for environmentalism. They called it ecology. Ecology is the science of the interrelatedness of the natural world. It addresses such problems as air and water pollution, the destruction of forests, the extinction of species, and toxic wastes, which are not separate, isolated problems. All elements of the earth’s environment are intimately and delicately linked. Damaging any one of those elements, therefore, risks damaging all the others. Among the early contributions to popular knowledge of ecology was the work of writer and naturalist Aldo Leopold. During a career in forest management, Leopold sought to apply the new scientific findings on ecology to his interactions with the natural world. And in 1949, he published a classic of environmental literature, The Sand County Almanac, in which he argued that humans had a responsibility to understand and maintain the balance of nature, that they should behave in the natural world according to a code that he called the “land ethic.” By then, the science of ecology was spreading widely in the scientific community. Among the findings of ecologists were such now-common ideas as the “food Rachel Carson chain,” the “ecosystem,” “biodiversity,” and “endangered species.” Rachel Carson’s sensational 1962 book, Silent Spring, which revealed the dangers of pesticides, was based solidly on the ideas of ecologists and did at least as much as Leopold’s work to introduce those ideas to a larger public.

Environmental Advocacy
 Among the major environmental organizations were the Wilderness Society, the Sierra Club, the National Audubon Society, the Nature Conservancy, the National Wildlife Federation, and the National Parks and Conservation Association. All of these organizations predated the rise of modern ecological science, but the growth of environmental threats and scientific efforts to address them kept these organizations engaged like never before. They found allies among such groups as the American Civil Liberties Union, the League of Women Voters, the National Council of Churches, and even the AFL-CIO. Out of these organizations emerged a new generation of environmental activists able to contribute to the legal and political battles of the movement. Scientists provided the necessary data. Lawyers fought battles with government agencies and in the courts. Many other forces contributed to what became the environmental movement. Lady Bird Johnson, the first lady, helped raise public awareness of the landscape with her energetic “beautification” campaign in the mid-1960s—a campaign unconnected to any ecological concepts, but one that reflected a growing popular dismay at the despoiling of the landscape by rapid economic growth. Members of the counterculture contributed to environmental awareness with their romanticization of the natural world and their repudiation of the “technocracy.” But perhaps the greatest force behind environmentalism was the condition of the environment itself. By the 1960s, the damage to the natural world from postwar population

THE CRISIS OF AUTHORITY
• 749 

 and economic growth was becoming hard to ignore. Water pollution—which had been a problem in some areas of the country for many decades—was becoming so Pollution widespread that almost every major city was dealing with the unpleasant sight and odor, as well as the health risks, of polluted rivers and lakes. In Cleveland, Ohio, for example, the Cuyahoga River actually burst into flame from time to time from the petroleum waste being dumped into it; the city declared the river an official fire hazard. Perhaps more alarming was the growing awareness that the air itself was becoming unhealthy, that toxic fumes from factories, power plants, and, most of all, automobiles were poisoning the atmosphere. Weather forecasts and official atmospheric information began to refer to “smog” levels—using a relatively new word formed from a combination of “smoke” and “fog,” which became an almost perpetual fact of daily life in such cities as Los Angeles and Denver. In 1969, a damaged oil-well platform off Santa Barbara, California, spewed hundreds of thousands of gallons of crude oil into the ocean just off the popular beaches of this affluent city. This oil spill had a tremendous impact on the environmental consciousness of millions of Americans. Another, much larger spill—indeed, the largest in American history—occurred off the coast of Alaska in 1989 when the giant tanker Exxon Valdez hit a reef in Prince William Sound. The damage it caused to the nearby shoreline and wildlife also greatly increased environmental consciousness. In April 2010, the Deepwater Horizon oil rig exploded forty-one miles off the Louisiana coast, killing eleven. Over the next three months, chemical dispersants used to control the spill and 5 million gallons of crude oil spread into Major Oil Spills the Gulf of Mexico, destroying sea life and damaging the coastline. The long-term effects are still unknown. Environmentalists brought to public attention many long-term dangers and helped create a broad and powerful movement.

Earth Day and Beyond
 On April 22, 1970, people all over the United States participated in the first “Earth Day.” Originally proposed by Wisconsin senator Gaylord Nelson as a series of teach-ins on college campuses, Earth Day gradually took on a much larger life. Carefully managed by people who wanted to avoid associations with the radical left, it had a less threatening quality than antiwar demonstrations and civil rights rallies seemed to have. According to some estimates, over 20 million Americans participated in Earth Day observances, making Earth Day, possibly, the largest single demonstration in the nation’s history. The cautious, centrist character of Earth Day and related efforts to popularize environmentalism helped create a movement that was for a time less divisive than other, more controversial causes. Gradually, environmentalism became more than simply a series of demonstrations and protests. It became part of the consciousness of the vast majority of Americans—absorbed into popular culture, built into primary and secondary education, and endorsed by almost all politicians (even if many of them actually opposed some environmental goals). It also became part of the fabric of public policy. In 1970, Congress passed and President Nixon signed the National Environmental Protection Act, which created a new agency—the Environmental Protection Agency—to enforce antipollution EPA Established standards on businesses and consumers. The Clean Air Act, also passed in 1970, and the Clean Water Act, passed in 1972, became additional tools in the government’s arsenal of weapons against environmental degradation.

750 • CHAPTER 30


 Different administrations displayed varying levels of support for environmental goals, and new environmental problems continued to emerge even as older ones sometimes found solutions. Environmentalism became simultaneously a movement, a set of public policies, and a broad national ideal—and it was the combination of all those aspects that made it a powerful force in American life.

NIXON, KISSINGER, AND THE VIETNAM WAR
 Richard Nixon assumed office in 1969 committed not only to restoring stability at home but to creating a new and more stable order in the world. Central to his hopes for international stability was a resolution of the stalemate in Vietnam. Yet the new president felt no freer than his predecessor to abandon the American commitment there.

Vietnamization
 Despite Nixon’s own deep interest in international affairs, he brought with him into government a man who at times seemed to overshadow the president himself in the Henry Kissinger conduct of diplomacy: Henry Kissinger, a Harvard professor whom Nixon appointed as his special assistant for national security affairs. Kissinger quickly established dominance over Secretary of State William Rogers and Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird. Together, Nixon and Kissinger set out to find an acceptable solution to the stalemate in Vietnam. The new Vietnam policy moved along several fronts. One was the move to “Vietnamize” the conflict—that is, train and equip the South Vietnamese military to assume the burden of combat in place of American forces. In the fall of 1969, Nixon announced the withdrawal of 60,000 American ground troops from Vietnam. By the fall of 1972, relatively few American soldiers remained in Indochina. From a peak of more than 540,000 in 1969, the number had dwindled to about 60,000. Vietnamization (and the decreased draft calls it produced) did help quiet domestic opposition to the war for a time. It did nothing, however, to break the stalemate in the negotiations with the North Vietnamese in Paris. The new administration decided that new military pressures would be necessary to do that.

Escalation
 By the end of 1969, Nixon and Kissinger had decided that the most effective way to tip the military balance in South Vietnam’s favor was to destroy bases in Cambodia and Laos that the U.S. military believed were the launching points for many North Vietnamese attacks. (Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam are neighboring states in the peninsula of Indochina.) Very early in his presidency, Nixon secretly ordered the air force to bomb these bases; on April 30, 1970, the president announced that he was sending U.S. ground troops across the border into Cambodia to destroy them. Literally overnight, the Cambodian invasion restored the dwindling antiwar movement to vigorous life. The first days of May saw widespread and vocal antiwar demonstrations. A mood of crisis was already mounting when, on May 4, four college students were killed and nine injured after members of the National Guard opened fire on antiwar demonstraKent State and Jackson State tors at Kent State University in Ohio. Ten days later, police killed

THE CRISIS OF AUTHORITY
• 751 

 two African American students at Jackson State University in Mississippi during a demonstration there. The clamor against the war spread into the government and the press. Congress angrily repealed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution in December. Then, in June 1971, first the New York Times and later other newspapers began publishing excerpts from a secret study of the war prepared by the Defense Department during the Johnson administration. The socalled Pentagon Papers were leaked to the press by former Defense official Pentagon Papers Daniel Ellsberg. They provided evidence that the government had been dishonest, both in reporting the military progress of the war and in explaining its own motives for American involvement. The administration went to court to suppress the documents, but the Supreme Court ruled that the press had the right to publish them. Morale and discipline among American troops in Vietnam were rapidly deteriorating in the waning years of the war. In 1971 Lieutenant William Calley was tried and convicted of overseeing a massacre of more than 100 unarmed South Vietnamese civilians in 1968 near the village of My Lai. It attracted wide public attention to the dehumanizing impact of the war on those who fought it—both Americans and Vietnamese. Less publicized were other, more widespread problems among American troops in Vietnam: desertion, drug addiction, racism, refusal to obey orders, even the killing of unpopular officers by enlisted men. By 1971, polls indicated that nearly two-thirds of Americans supported withdrawal from Vietnam. President Nixon, however, believed that a defeat in Vietnam would cause unacceptable damage to the nation’s credibility. The FBI, the CIA, the White House itself, and other federal agencies increased their efforts to discredit and harass antiwar and radical groups, often through illegal means. In Indochina, meanwhile, the fighting raged on. American bombing in Vietnam and Cambodia increased. In March 1972, the North Vietnamese mounted their biggest offensive since 1968 (the so-called Easter offensive). American and South Vietnamese Easter Offensive forces managed to halt the communist advance, but it was clear that without American support, the South Vietnamese would not have succeeded. At the same time, Nixon ordered American planes to bomb targets near Hanoi, the capital of North Vietnam, and Haiphong, its principal port, and called for the mining of seven North Vietnamese harbors.

 “Peace with Honor” As the 1972 presidential election approached, the administration stepped up its effort to produce a breakthrough in negotiations with the North Vietnamese. In April, the president dropped his longtime insistence on the removal of North Vietnamese troops from the south before any American withdrawal. Meanwhile, Henry Kissinger met privately in Paris with the North Vietnamese foreign secretary, Le Duc Tho, to work out terms for a cease-fire. On October 26, only days before the presidential election, Kissinger announced that “peace is at hand.” Several weeks later (after the election), negotiations broke down once again. Although both the American and the North Vietnamese governments were ready to accept the Kissinger–Tho plan for a cease-fire, President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam balked, still insisting on a full withdrawal of North Vietnamese forces from the south. Kissinger tried to win additional concessions from the communists to meet Thieu’s objections, but on December 16 talks broke off. The next day, December 17, American B-52s began the heaviest and most destructive air raids of the entire war on Hanoi, Haiphong, and other North Vietnamese targets.

752 • CHAPTER 30


 Civilian casualties were high, and fifteen American B-52s were shot down by the North Vietnamese; in the entire war to that point, the United States had lost only one of the “Christmas Bombing” giant bombers. On December 30, Nixon terminated the “Christmas bombing.” The United States and the North Vietnamese returned to the conference table; and on January 27, 1973, they signed an “agreement on ending the war and restoring peace in Vietnam.” Nixon claimed that the Christmas bombing had forced the North Vietnamese to relent. At least equally important, however, was the enormous American pressure on Thieu to accept the cease-fire. The terms of the Paris accords were little different from those Kissinger and Tho had accepted in principle a few months before. Nor were they much different from the peace plan Johnson had proposed in 1968. There would be an immediate ceasefire. The North Vietnamese would release several hundred American prisoners of war. The Thieu regime would survive for the moment, but North Vietnamese forces already in the south would remain there. An undefined committee would work out a permanent settlement.

 A harried U.S. official struggles to keep panicking Vietnamese from boarding an already overpacked helicopter on the roof of the U.S. embassy in Saigon. The hurried evacuation of Americans took place only hours before the arrival of North Vietnamese troops, signaling the final defeat of South Vietnam. (© AP Images) THE EVACUATION OF SAIGON

THE CRISIS OF AUTHORITY
• 753 

Defeat in Indochina
 American forces were hardly out of Indochina before the Paris accords began to collapse. In March 1975, the North Vietnamese launched a full-scale offensive against the now greatly weakened forces of South Vietnam. Thieu appealed to Washington for assistance. The president (now Gerald Ford) appealed to Congress for additional funding; Congress refused. Late in April 1975, communist forces marched into Saigon, shortly Fall of Saigon after officials of the Thieu regime and the staff of the American embassy had fled the country in humiliating disarray. The communist forces quickly occupied the capital, renamed it Ho Chi Minh City, and began the process of reuniting Vietnam under the government based in Hanoi. At about the same time, the Lon Nol regime in Cambodia fell to the murderous forces of the Khmer Rouge—whose brutal policies led to the death of more than a third of the country’s people over the next several years. Such were the dismal results of more than a decade of direct American military involvement in Vietnam. More than 1.2 million Vietnamese soldiers had died in combat, along with countless civilians throughout the region. A beautiful land had been ravaged, its agrarian economy left in ruins; until an economic revival began in the early 1990s, Vietnam remained for more than a decade one of the poorest nations in the world. The United States had paid a heavy price as well. The war had cost the nation almost $150 billion in direct costs and much more indirectly. It had resulted in the deaths of over 57,000 young Americans and the injury of 300,000 more. And the nation had ­suffered a blow to its confidence and self-esteem from which it did not soon recover.

NIXON, KISSINGER, AND THE WORLD
 The continuing war in Vietnam provided an unhappy backdrop to what Nixon considered his larger mission in world affairs: the construction of a new international order. The president had become convinced that the old assumptions of a “bipolar” world—in which the United States and the Soviet Union were the only real great powers—were now obsolete. America must adapt to the new “multipolar” international structure, in which China, Japan, and Western Europe were becoming major, independent forces. Nixon had a considerable advantage over many other politicians in changing the assumptions behind American foreign policy. His long anticommunist record gave him credibility among many conservatives for his effort to transform American relations with communist China and the Soviet Union.

 The China Initiative and Soviet–American Détente For more than twenty years, ever since the fall of Chiang Kai-shek in 1949, the United States had treated China, the most populous nation on earth, as if it did not exist. Instead, America recognized the regime-in-exile on the small island of Taiwan as the legitimate government of China. Nixon and Kissinger wanted to forge a new relationship with the Chinese communists—in part to strengthen them as a counterbalance to the Soviet Union. The Chinese, for their part, were eager to end China’s own isolation from the international arena. In July 1971, Nixon sent Henry Kissinger on a secret mission to Beijing. When Kissinger returned, the president made the startling announcement that he would visit China himself within the next few months. That fall, with American approval, the United

754 • CHAPTER 30


 President Nixon’s 1972 visit to China was an important step in normalizing relations between the United States and the People’s Republic of China. Here, Nixon toasts the developing relationship with Prime Minister Zhou Enlai. (© Universal Images Group/Getty Images) NIXON IN CHINA

 Nations admitted the communist government of China and expelled the representatives of the Taiwan regime. Finally, in February 1972, Nixon paid a formal visit to China. It erased much of the deep animosity between the United States and the Chinese communists. Nixon did not yet formally recognize the communist regime, but in 1972 the United States and China began low-level diplomatic relations. The initiatives in China coincided with an effort by the Nixon administration to improve relations with the Soviet Union, an initiative known by the French word détente. In 1971, American and Soviet diplomats produced the first Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT I), which froze the arsenals of some nuclear missiles (ICBMs) on both sides at present levels. In May of that year, the president traveled to Moscow to sign the agreement. The next year, the Soviet premier, Leonid Brezhnev, visited Washington.

 Dealing with the Third World The policies of rapprochement with communist China and détente with the Soviet Union reflected Nixon’s and Kissinger’s belief in the importance of stable relationships among the great powers. But, as America’s experience in Vietnam already illustrated, the socalled Third World remained the most volatile and dangerous source of international tension. Since the end of World War I, the United States and the European powers had lost or withdrawn control over former colonies. The result was a number of newly independent but economically fragile and politically unstable nations around the globe. (See “America in the World: The End of Colonialism.”) The Nixon–Kissinger policy toward the Third World tried to maintain the status quo without involving the United States too deeply in local disputes. In 1969 and 1970, the Nixon Doctrine president described what became known as the Nixon Doctrine, by which the United States would “participate in the defense and development of allies and friends”

THE CRISIS OF AUTHORITY
• 755 

 but would leave the “basic responsibility” for the future of those “friends” to the nations themselves. In practice, the Nixon Doctrine meant a declining American interest in contributing to Third World development. There was also a growing contempt for the United Nations, where underdeveloped nations were gaining influence through their sheer numbers. And there was increasing American support for authoritarian regimes attempting to withstand radical challenges from within. In 1970, for example, the CIA poured substantial funds into Chile to help support the government against a communist challenge. When the Marxist candidate for president, Salvador Allende, came to power through an open election despite Allende Overthrown American efforts, the United States began funneling more money to opposition forces in Chile to help destabilize the new government. In 1973, a military junta seized power from Allende, who was subsequently murdered. The United States developed a friendly relationship with the new, repressive military government of General Augusto Pinochet. In the Middle East, conditions grew more volatile in the aftermath of a 1967 war in which Israel had occupied substantial new territories, dislodging many Palestinian Arabs from their homes. The refugees were a source of considerable instability in Jordan, Lebanon, and the other surrounding countries into which they moved. In October 1973, on the Jewish high holy day of Yom Kippur, Egyptian and Syrian forces attacked Israel. For ten days, the Israelis struggled to recover from the surprise attack; finally, they launched an effective counteroffensive against Egyptian forces in the Sinai. At that point, the United States intervened, placing heavy pressure on Israel to accept a cease-fire rather than press its advantage. The Yom Kippur War demonstrated the growing dependence of the United States and its allies on Arab oil. A brief but painful embargo in 1973–1974 by the Arab members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Companies (OPEC) against OPEC Embargo the United States and other allies that supported Israel provided an ominous warning of the costs of dependence on foreign oil. It also prompted Congress to pass fuel economy standards, requiring automakers to raise average mileage from 13.5 miles per gallon to 27. (The standard has since been raised to 54.5 mpg by 2025.)

POLITICS AND ECONOMICS
IN THE NIXON YEARS
 Nixon ran for president in 1968, promising a return to more conservative social and economic policies and a restoration of law and order. Once he was in office, however, his domestic policies sometimes continued and even expanded the liberal initiatives of the previous two administrations.

Domestic Initiatives
 Many of Nixon’s domestic policies were a response to what he believed to be the demands of his constituency—the “silent majority” of conservative, mostly “Silent Majority” ­middle-class people who, he believed, wanted to reduce federal interference in local affairs. He tried, unsuccessfully, to persuade Congress to pass legislation prohibiting school desegregation through the use of forced busing. He forbade the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (now called the Department of Health and Human Services) to cut off federal funds from school districts that had failed to comply with court

AMERICA IN THE WORLD


The End of Colonialism
 On July 4, 1946, less than a year after the close of World War II, a ceremony in Manila marked what Senator Millard Tydings of Maryland called “one of the most unprecedented, most idealistic, and most far-reaching events in all recorded history.” On that day, the United States voluntarily ended nearly five decades of colonial control of the Philippines, which it had acquired as part of the spoils from the 1898 Spanish-American War. Philippine independence was only a small part of a dramatic change in the political structure of the world. The close of World War II marked not only the defeat of fascism in Germany, Italy, and Japan, but also the beginning of the end of the formal system of imperialism that European powers had maintained for centuries. The repudiation of colonialism was driven in part by the heightened belief in democracy and self-determination that the war helped strengthen through much of the world. It was also driven by the weakness of the European powers after World War II and their inability to sustain control over their ­increasingly restive colonies. Like most great geopolitical changes, the drive for colonial ­independence was turbulent and often violent. The United States had been a latecomer to the imperialist system. But even its peaceful divestiture of the Philippines reflected the challenges many imperial powers and postcolonial nations faced in renegotiating colonial relationships. America was not quite as ready to cede military presence and economic influence in the region as it was to give up political responsibility over the islands. Philippine independence came with important caveats: that the United States maintained control of Fillipino military bases and that required (through the Bell Trade Act, passed by Congress in 1946) that the Philippines not ­engage in any direct economic competition with the United States and that it revise its constitution to allow American interests free and

 unfettered access to the nation’s natural resources. Many Filipinos argue that their nation did not achieve full independence until 1991, when the Philippine Senate refused to ratify a treaty that would have extended the American lease on the Subic Bay naval base (once the largest U.S. Navy installation in the Pacific). A year later, the United States closed the base and left, marking the first time in 400 years that the Philippines (once a Spanish possession) was not home to a foreign military power. England’s imperial holdings were the vastest in the world, and the existence of the British Empire was deeply embedded in England’s economic life and national self-­ image. But it, too, withdrew from most of its colonies in the decades after World War II— beginning in 1947 with its largest and most important colony, India. The British Raj—as the colonial government was known—­ withdrew from South Asia in response to a growing independence movement on the subcontinent. As often happened as colonial rule ended, suppressed conflicts in the native population quickly emerged—in the case of India, between Hindus and Muslims. The price of Indian independence, therefore, was the partition of the country into India and Pakistan (and, several decades later, Bangladesh). A year later, the British gave up its World War I mandate of Palestine (ceding the territory to the United Nations and allowing for the creation of Israel) as well as many of its holdings in Southeast Asia, including Burma and Ceylon. Malaya followed in 1957 and Singapore in 1965. In 1982, England passed the Canada Act, effectively severing Canada from the United Kingdom and culminating a move toward full Canadian self-government that had begun several d ­ ecades earlier. In 1997, England returned one of its last ­important overseas territories, Hong Kong, to the control of China, bringing nearly to an end the era of the British Empire.

 The dissolution of the British Empire did not always proceed smoothly. The Suez Crisis of 1956, in which the combined efforts of Britain, France, and Israel failed to halt Egypt’s nationalization of the Suez Canal, dealt a decisive blow to England’s status as a major power in the Middle East. In 1982, England’s dispute over the tiny Falkland Islands erupted into war with Argentina, which claimed the islands (just off its coast) as its own. After the deaths of 258 English and 649 Argentine soldiers, England maintained its control of the Falklands, although Argentina continues to assert its right to the islands. Despite these controversies, the dissolution of the British Empire proceeded relatively smoothly compared to the experience of the French, who became engaged in several major conflicts after 1945. In late 1946, Vietnamese nationalists rose up against the French colonial government that had ­recently reoccupied the region after the defeat of Japan in World War II. France’s effort to ­return to Vietnam culminated ultimately in its defeat at Dien Bien Phu in 1954 and its subsequent withdrawal from Indochina. France also became embroiled in, and tried to suppress by force, a number of other violent colonial uprisings—in Madagascar, Cameroon, and, most notably, Algeria. The Algerian War (1954–1962) was a particularly bloody and costly conflict, taking on aspects of a civil war and involving guerrilla warfare, torture, acts of terrorism, and, eventually, the collapse of the French government in 1958. Algeria ultimately won its independence. The end of the colonial system had its greatest impact on Africa. European powers had carved up almost all of sub-Saharan Africa in the nineteenth century. In the decades after World War II, almost all the African colonies won their independence, even if not always easily: Morocco (1956), Ghana (1957), the Congo (1960), Nigeria (1960), Uganda (1962), Kenya (1963), and Gambia (1965). African nationalism was troubled for decades by political instability and, in some countries, extreme poverty. The Caribbean also saw many new independent nations born in the postwar era, including Jamaica (1961), Trinidad and Tobago (1962), Barbados (1966), and Guyana (1966).

 The most recent epicenter of independence movements has been in the lands that used to comprise the former Soviet Union. A long and costly war in Afghanistan began in the 1970s as the Soviet Union struggled to retain control of the nation in the face of powerful local insurgencies. The war was one of the principal factors in the unraveling of the Soviet Empire that began in 1991. Many of the former Soviet republics—which considered themselves colonies of Russia—soon separated from Russia and became independent nations. These included Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania—the formerly independent Baltic nations seized by the Soviet Union ­during World War II. Other former Soviet possessions that became independent nations included Ukraine, Moldavia, Armenia, Georgia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan. Russia continues to deal with the problems of empire. A ­vicious conflict with Chechnya, an Islamic area of Russia insisting on independence, ­created terror and instability for years. The end of colonialism was one of the most epochal global changes of the last several centuries—a change that brought to an end a system that was based on the assumption of European (and American) superiority over non-Western peoples. Despite the many problems new postcolonial nations have ­encountered since their independence, few, if any, such nations would choose to become colonies again. Although formal colonialism came to an end in the post–World War II era, other aspects of imperialism did not. Many former colonies, which comprise much of the nonindustrialized world, still struggle with the indirect exercise of economic power that wealthy Western nations continue to exert over them.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. How did the experience of World War II

 contribute to the end of colonialism? 2. What have been the effects of colonialism—

 and the end of colonialism—on Africa? Why have the effects been so pronounced on that continent, more so than in other areas of the world?

758 • CHAPTER 30


 orders to integrate. At the same time, he began to reduce or dismantle many of the social programs of the Great Society and the New Frontier. In 1973, he abolished the Office of Economic Opportunity—a centerpiece of the antipoverty program of the Johnson years. Yet Nixon’s domestic policies had progressive and creative elements as well. He signed legislation creating the Environmental Protection Agency and establishing the most stringent environmental regulations in the nation’s history. He ordered the first affirmative action program for workers on federally funded projects. One of the administration’s boldest efforts was an attempt to overhaul the nation’s welfare system. Nixon proposed replacing the existing system with what he called the Family Assistance Plan (FAP). It would, in effect, have created a guaranteed annual income for all Americans: $1,600 in federal grants, which could be supplemented by outside earnings up to $4,000. The FAP won approval in the House in 1970, but the bill failed in the Senate. Nixon also became the first president since Truman to propose a plan for national health insurance, which likewise made no progress in Congress.

From the Warren Court to the Nixon Court
 Of all the liberal institutions that aroused the enmity of the conservative silent majority in the 1950s and 1960s, none evoked more anger and bitterness than the Supreme Court Warren Court Rulings under Chief Justice Earl Warren. The Warren Court’s rulings on racial matters disrupted traditional social patterns in both the North and the South. Its defense of civil liberties directly contributed to the increase in crime, disorder, and moral decay in the eyes of many Americans. In Engel v. Vitale (1962), the Court ruled that prayers in public schools were unconstitutional, sparking outrage among religious fundamentalists and others. In Roth v. United States (1957), the Court sharply limited the authority of local governments to curb pornography. In a series of other decisions, the Court greatly strengthened the civil rights of criminal defendants and, many Americans believed, greatly weakened the power of law enforcement officials to do their jobs. For example, in Gideon v. Wainwright (1963), the Court ruled that every felony defendant was entitled to a lawyer, regardless of his or her ability to pay. In Escobedo v. Illinois (1964), it ruled that a defendant must be allowed access to a lawyer before questioning by police. In Miranda v. Arizona (1966), the Court confirmed the obligation of authorities to inform a criminal suspect of his or her rights. By 1968, the Warren Court had become the target of Americans who felt the United States had shifted too far toward helping poor, dispossessed, and criminal individuals at the expense of the middle class. Nixon promised to give the Court a more conservative cast. When Chief Justice Earl Warren retired early in 1969, Nixon replaced him with a federal appeals court judge of conservative leanings, Warren Burger. At about the same time, Associate Justice Abe Fortas resigned his seat after the disclosure of a series of alleged financial improprieties. To replace him, Nixon named Clement F. Haynsworth, a respected federal circuit court judge from South Carolina. But Haynsworth came under fire from Senate liberals, black organizations, and labor unions for his conservative record on civil rights. The Senate rejected him. Nixon’s next choice was G. Harrold Carswell, a Florida federal appeals court judge of little distinction. He, too, was rejected. Nixon angrily denounced the votes. But he was careful thereafter to choose men of standing within the legal community to fill vacancies on the Supreme Court: Harry Blackmun, a moderate jurist from Minnesota; Lewis F. Powell Jr., a respected lawyer from Virginia; and William Rehnquist, a member of the Nixon Justice Department.

THE CRISIS OF AUTHORITY
• 759 

 The new Court, however, fell far short of what the president and many conservatives had expected. Rather than retreating from its commitment to social reform, the Court in many areas actually moved further toward it. In Swann v. ­Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education (1971), it ruled in favor of forced busing to achieve racial Burger Court Rulings balance in schools. Despite intense and occasionally violent opposition of local communities as diverse as Boston and Louisville, Kentucky, the judicial commitment to integration was not overturned. In Furman v. Georgia (1972), the Court overturned existing capital punishment statutes and established strict new guidelines for such laws in the future. In Roe v. Wade (1973), one of the most controversial decisions in the Court’s modern history, it struck down laws forbidding abortions in the first three months of pregnancy. In other decisions, however, the Burger Court did demonstrate a more conservative temperament than the Warren Court had shown. Although the justices approved busing as a tool for achieving integration, they rejected, in Milliken v. Bradley (1974), a plan to transfer students across municipal lines (in this case, between Detroit and its suburbs) to achieve racial balance. While the Court upheld the principle of affirmative action in its celebrated 1978 decision, Bakke v. Board of Regents of California, it established restrictive new guidelines for such programs in the future. In Stone v. Powell (1976), the Court agreed to certain limits on the right of a defendant to appeal a state conviction to the federal judiciary.

The 1972 Landslide
 Nixon entered the presidential race in 1972 with substantial strength. His energetic reelection committee had collected enormous sums of money. The president himself used the powers of incumbency to strengthen his political standing in strategic areas. And Nixon’s foreign policy successes, especially his trip to China, increased his stature in the eyes of the nation. Nixon was most fortunate in 1972, however, in his opposition. George Wallace, partly at Nixon’s urging, entered the Democratic primaries and helped divide the party until a would-be assassin shot the Alabama governor during a rally at a Maryland shopping center in May. Paralyzed from the waist down, Wallace was unable to continue campaigning. In the meantime, the most liberal factions of the party succeeded in establishing their candidate, Senator George S. McGovern of South Dakota, as the George McGovern ­front-runner for the nomination. An outspoken critic of the war and a forceful advocate of liberal positions on many social and economic issues, McGovern profited greatly from party reforms (which he himself had helped draft) that gave increased influence to women, minorities, and young people in the selection of the Democratic ticket. But in the process, the McGovern campaign came to be associated with aspects of the turbulent 1960s that many middle-class Americans were eager to reject. On election day, Nixon won reelection by one of the largest margins in history: 60.7 percent of the popular vote to McGovern’s 37.5 percent and an electoral margin of 520 to 17. The Democratic candidate carried only Massachusetts and the District of Columbia. But serious problems, some beyond the president’s control and others of his own making, lurked in the wings.

The Troubled Economy
 Although it was a political scandal that would ultimately destroy the Nixon presidency, the most important issue of the early 1970s was the beginning of a long-term transformation

760 • CHAPTER 30


 of the American economy. For three decades, that economy had been the envy of the world. In fact, however, America’s prosperity rested in part on several artificial conditions that were rapidly disappearing by the late 1960s. The most immediate change was the end of the nation’s easy access to cheap raw materials, a change that became a major cause of the serious inflation that plagued the economy through much of the 1970s. For many years, OPEC had operated as an informal bargaining unit for the sale of oil by Third World nations but had seldom managed to exercise any real strength. But in the early 1970s, OPEC began to use its oil both as an economic tool and as a political weapon. In 1973, in the midst of the Yom Kippur War, Arab members of OPEC announced that they would no longer ship petroleum to nations supporting Israel—that is, to the United States and its allies in Western Europe. At about the same time, the OPEC nations agreed to raise their prices 500 percent (from $3 to $15 a barrel). These twin shocks produced momentary economic chaos in the West. The United States suffered its first fuel shortage since World War II. And although the crisis eased a few months later, the price of energy continued to rise. Another, longer-term change in the American economy was the transformation of the nation’s manufacturing sector. Ever since World War II, American industry had enjoyed relatively little competition from the rest of the world. By the end of the 1960s, however, both Western Europe and Japan had recovered from the damage their manufacturing sectors had absorbed during World War II. By the early 1970s, they were providing stiff competition to American firms in the sale of automobiles, steel, and many other products, both in world markets and within the United States. Some American corporations failed. Others restructured themselves to become more competitive again in world markets but in the process closed many older plants and eliminated hundreds of thousands of oncelucrative manufacturing jobs. The high-wage, high-employment industrial economy that had been a central fact of American life since the 1940s was gradually disappearing.

The Nixon Response
 Nixon’s initial answer to these mounting economic problems was a conventional antiinflationary one. He reduced federal spending and raised taxes, producing a modest budget surplus in 1969. But when those policies proved difficult to sustain, Nixon turned increasingly to control of the currency. Placing conservative economists at the head of the Federal Reserve Board, he ensured sharply higher interest rates and a contraction of the money supply. Even so, the cost of living rose a cumulative 15 percent during Nixon’s first two and a half years in office. Economic growth, in the meantime, declined. In the summer of 1971, Nixon imposed a ninety-day freeze on all wages and prices at their existing levels. Then, in November, he launched the second phase of his economic plan: mandatory guidelines for some wage and price increases, to be administered by a federal agency. Inflation subsided temporarily, but the recession continued. Fearful that the recession would be more damaging than inflation in an election year, the administration reversed itself late in 1971: interest rates were allowed to drop sharply, and government spending increased— producing the largest budget deficit since World War II. The new tactics helped revive the economy in the short term, but inflation rose substantially. In 1973, prices rose 9 percent; in 1974, after the Arab oil embargo and the OPEC price increases, they rose 12 percent—the highest rate since shortly after World War II. The new energy crisis, in the meantime, was quickly becoming a national preoccupation. But while Nixon talked often about the need to achieve “energy independence,” he offered few concrete proposals.

THE CRISIS OF AUTHORITY
• 761 

THE WATERGATE CRISIS
 Although economic problems greatly concerned the American people in the 1970s, another stunning development preoccupied the nation beginning early in 1973: the fall of Richard Nixon. Scholars wrangle over the exact origins and legacies of Nixon’s fall from grace, but they widely agree that the president’s demise was in part a result of the turbulent climate of the early 1970s. It was also a result of his own reckless personality and overpowering fear that he and the nation faced grave dangers from the radicals and dissidents who were challenging his policies.

The Scandals
 Early on the morning of June 17, 1972, police arrested five men who had broken into the headquarters of the Democratic National Committee in the Watergate office building in Washington, D.C. Two others were seized a short time later and charged with supervising the break-in. When reporters for the Washington Post began researching the backgrounds of the culprits, they discovered that among those involved in the burglary were former employees of the Committee for the Re-Election of the President (CRP). One of them had worked in the White House itself. They had, moreover, been paid for the break-in from a secret fund of Nixon’s reelection committee, a fund controlled by, among others, ­members of the White House staff. Public interest in the disclosures grew slowly in the last months of 1972. Early in 1973, however, the Watergate burglars went on trial; and under prodding from federal judge John J. Sirica, one of the defendants, James W. McCord, agreed to cooperate both with the grand jury and with a special Senate investigating committee recently established under Senator Sam J. Ervin of North Carolina. McCord’s testimony opened a floodgate of confessions, and for months a parade of White House and campaign officials exposed one illegality after another. Foremost among them was a member of the inner circle of the White House, John Dean, counsel to the president, who had warned Nixon that the Watergate cover-up was a “cancer on the presidency” and who later leveled allegations against Nixon himself. Two different sets of scandals emerged from the investigations. One was a general pattern of abuses of power involving both the White House and the Nixon campaign committee, which included, but was not limited to, the Watergate break-in. The other scandal, Watergate and the one that became the major focus of public attention for nearly two years, was the way in which the administration tried to manage the investigations of the Watergate breakin and other abuses—a pattern of behavior that became known as the “cover-up.” There was never any conclusive evidence that the president had planned or approved the burglary in advance. But there was mounting evidence that he had been involved in illegal efforts to obstruct investigations of the episode. (See “Debating the Past: Watergate.”) Nixon accepted the departure of members of his administration implicated in the scandals. But the president continued to insist on his own innocence. There the matter might have rested had it not been for the disclosure during the Senate hearings of a White House taping system that had recorded virtually every conversation in the president’s office during the period in question. All those investigating the scandals sought access Watergate Tapes to the tapes. Nixon, pleading “executive privilege,” refused to release them. A special prosecutor appointed by the president to handle the Watergate cases, Harvard law ­professor Archibald Cox, took Nixon to court in October 1973 in an effort to force him to relinquish the recordings. Nixon fired Cox and suffered the humiliation of watching both Attorney

DEBATING THE PAST


Watergate
 Forty-two years after Watergate—one of the most famous political scandals in American history—historians and others continue to argue about its causes and significance. Their interpretations tend to fall into several broad categories. One argument emphasizes the evolution of the institution of the presidency over time and sees Watergate as the result of a much larger pattern of presidential usurpations of power that stretched back at least several decades. Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. helped develop this argument in his 1973 book The Imperial Presidency, which argues that ever since World War II, Americans have believed that the nation was in a state of permanent crisis—threatened from abroad by the menace of communism, threatened from within by the danger of i­nsufficient will. A succession of presidents believed in the urgency of this crisis, and in their duty to take whatever measures might be necessary to combat it. That led them gradually to usurp more and more power from Congress, from the courts, and from the public. Initially, this expansion of presidential power came in the realm of international affairs. It included covert and at times illegal activities overseas. Gradually, presidents began to look for ways to circumvent constraints in domestic matters as well. Nixon’s actions in the Watergate crisis were, in other words, a culmination of this long and steady expansion of covert presidential power. Jonathan Schell, in The Time of Illusion (1975), offers a variation of this argument, tying the crisis of the presidency to the pressure that nuclear weapons place on presidents to protect the nation’s—and their own—“credibility.” 762 •

 Another explanation of Watergate emphasizes the difficult social and political ­environment of the late 1960s and early 1970s. Nixon entered office, according to this view, facing an unprecedentedly radical opposition that would stop at nothing to discredit the war and destroy his ­authority. He found himself, therefore, drawn into taking similarly desperate measures of his own to defend himself. Nixon made this ­argument in his own 1978 memoirs: Now that this season of mindless terror has fortunately passed, it is difficult—perhaps impossible—to convey a sense of the pressures that were influencing my actions and reactions during this period, but it was this epidemic of unprecedented domestic terrorism that prompted our efforts to discover the best means by which to deal with this new phenomenon of highly organized and highly skilled revolutionaries dedicated to the violent destruction of our democratic system.*

 The historian Herbert Parmet echoes parts of this argument in Richard Nixon and His America (1990). Stephen Ambrose offers a more muted version of the same view in Richard Nixon (1989). Most of those who have written about Watergate, however, search for the explanation not in institutional or social forces but in the personalities of the people ­involved and, most notably, in the personality of Richard Nixon. Even many of those who have developed structural explanations (Schlesinger, Schell, and Ambrose, for e­xample) return eventually to Nixon himself as the most important explanation for Watergate. Others begin there, perhaps

 most notably Stanley I. Kutler, in The Wars of Watergate (1990) and, later, Abuse of Power (1997), in which he presents extensive excerpts from conversations about Watergate taped in the Nixon White House. Kutler emphasizes Nixon’s lifelong resort to vicious political tactics and his long-standing belief that he was a ­special target of unscrupulous enemies and had to “get” them before they got him. Watergate was rooted, Kutler argues, “in the personality and history of Nixon himself.” A “corrosive hatred,” he claims, “­decisively shaped Nixon’s own behavior, his career, and eventually his historical standing.”

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. For scholars who cite social and institu-

 tional forces as explanations for Watergate, what are these forces? How did they contribute to the Watergate scandal? 2. Most scholars see Nixon himself as the party most responsible for Watergate. How did Nixon’s personality contribute to both his rise to power as president and his downfall as a result of Watergate? 3. What have been the lasting effects of Watergate on the public’s perception of the presidency and the government?

RN:
The Memoirs of Richard Nixon (New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1978). Copyright © 1978 by Richard  Nixon. All rights reserved. Reprinted by permission of the Estate of Richard Nixon.

 General Elliot Richardson and his deputy resign in protest. This “Saturday night massacre,” as it was called, made the president’s predicament much worse. Not only did public pressure force him to appoint a new special prosecutor, Texas attorney Leon Jaworski, who proved just as determined as Cox to subpoena the tapes; but the episode precipitated an investigation by the House of Representatives into the possibility of impeachment.

The Fall of Richard Nixon
 Nixon’s situation deteriorated further in the following months. Late in 1973, Vice President Spiro Agnew became embroiled in a scandal of his own when evidence surfaced that he had accepted bribes and kickbacks while serving as governor of Maryland and even as vice president. In return for a Justice Department agreement not to press the case, Agnew pleaded no contest to a lesser charge of income-tax evasion and resigned Ford Replaces Agnew from the government. With the controversial Agnew no longer in line to succeed to the presidency, the prospect of removing Nixon from the White House became less worrisome to his opponents. The new vice president was House Minority Leader Gerald Ford, an amiable and popular Michigan congressman. The impeachment investigation quickly gathered momentum. In April 1974, in an effort to head off further subpoenas of the tapes, the president released transcripts of a number of relevant conversations, claiming that they proved his innocence. Investigators and much of the public felt otherwise. Even these edited tapes seemed to suggest Nixon’s complicity in the cover-up. In July, the crisis reached a climax. First the Supreme Court ruled unanimously, in United States v. Richard M. Nixon, that the president must relinquish the tapes to Special Prosecutor Jaworski. Days later, the House Judiciary Committee voted to ­recommend three articles of impeachment. Even without additional evidence, Nixon might well have been impeached by the full House and convicted by the Senate. Early in August, however, he provided at last the “smoking gun”—the concrete proof of his guilt—that his defenders had long contended was missing from the case against him. Among the tapes that the Supreme Court compelled • 763

764 • CHAPTER 30


NIXON’S FAREWELL
Only moments before, Nixon had been in tears, saying good-bye to his staff in the East Room of the White House. But as he boarded a helicopter to begin his trip home to California shortly after resigning as president, he flashed his trademark “victory” sign to the crowd on the White House lawn. (© Bettmann/Corbis) 
 Nixon to relinquish were several that offered apparently incontrovertible evidence of his involvement in the Watergate cover-up. Only three days after the burglary, the recordings disclosed, the president had ordered the FBI to stop investigating the break-in. Impeachment and conviction now seemed inevitable. For several days, Nixon cloistered himself in the White House. Finally, on August 8, Resignation 1974, he announced his resignation—the first president in American history ever to do so. At noon the next day, while Nixon and his family flew west to their home in California, Gerald Ford took the oath of office as president. Many Americans expressed relief and exhilaration that, as the new president put it, “our long national nightmare is over.” But the wave of good feeling could not obscure the deeper and more lasting damage of the Watergate crisis. In a society in which distrust of leaders and institutions of authority was already widespread, the fall of Richard Nixon confirmed for many Americans their most cynical assumptions about the untrustworthy character of American public life.

CONCLUSION
 The victory of Richard Nixon in the 1968 presidential election represented a popular repudiation of turbulence and radicalism. It was a call for a restoration of order and ­stability. But order and stability were not the dominant characteristics of Nixon’s troubled years in office. Nixon entered office when the political left and the counterculture were approaching the peak of their influence. American culture and society in the late 1960s and early 1970s were shaped decisively by, and were deeply divided over, the challenges by young people

THE CRISIS OF AUTHORITY
• 765 

 to the prevailing social norms. These were also the years in which a host of new liberation movements joined the drive for racial equality and when, above all, women mobilized effectively to demand changes in the way society treated gender differences. Nixon had run for office attacking the failure of his predecessor to end the war in Vietnam. But for four years under his presidency, the war—and the protests against it—continued and even in some respects escalated. The division of opinion over the war was as deep as any of the other divisions in national life. It continued to poison the nation’s politics and social fabric until the American role in the conflict finally shuddered to a close in 1973. But much of the controversy and division in the 1970s was a product of the Nixon presidency itself. Nixon was in many ways a dynamic and even visionary leader, who proposed some important domestic reforms and who made important changes in American foreign policy, most notably making overtures to communist China and forging détente with the Soviet Union. He was also, however, a devious, secretive man whose White House became engaged in a series of covert activities that produced the most dramatic political scandal in American history. Watergate, as it was called, preoccupied much of the nation for nearly two years beginning in 1972; and ultimately, in the summer of 1974, the scandal forced Richard Nixon—who had been reelected to office only two years before by one of the largest majorities in modern history—to become the first president in American history to resign. Nixon was elected to lead the nation out of a war it no longer wanted, but his shameful exit from office and the ongoing Vietnam War continued to damage the nation’s self-confidence and trust in government.

KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
American Indian Movement
(AIM) 741
Betty Friedan 745
 César Chávez 743 counterculture 739 détente 754 Earth Day 749 Free Speech Movement 738 Gerald Ford 763

Henry Kissinger 750
Indian Civil Rights Act 741
National Organization for
 Women (NOW) 746 New Left 737 Nixon Doctrine 754 Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) 755

Rachel Carson 748
Roe v. Wade 747
 silent majority 755 Stonewall Riot 744 Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) 737 Vietnamization 750 Watergate 761 Woodstock 740

RECALL AND REFLECT
 1. What was the New Left? How was it related to the counterculture? 2. How did ethnic minorities, especially Native Americans and Latinos, challenge the status quo

 in the 1970s? 3. What were the objectives of the new feminism of the 1970s? What gains did women achieve

 in this era? What setbacks did the feminist movement experience? 4. What was the “Nixon Doctrine”? How did this doctrine play out in foreign policy? 5. What was the effect of Nixon’s policies on the U.S. economy? What was Nixon’s response to

 escalating economic difficulties?



FROM “THE AGE
OF LIMITS” TO
THE AGE OF
REAGAN
POLITICS AND DIPLOMACY AFTER WATERGATE
THE RISE OF THE NEW CONSERVATIVE MOVEMENT
THE “REAGAN REVOLUTION”
AMERICA AND THE WANING OF THE COLD WAR


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. What economic and energy problems plagued the presidencies of Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter? How did Ford and Carter attempt to deal with these problems? 2. What was the “New Right,” and what effect did its rise have on American politics? 3. What was Reaganomics, and how did this policy affect the national economy?

THE FRUSTRATIONS OF THE EARLY 1970s
—the defeat in Vietnam, the Watergate crisis, the decay of the American economy—inflicted damaging blows to the confident, optimistic nationalism that had characterized so much of the postwar era. Some Americans responded to these problems by announcing the arrival of an “age of limits,” in which Americans would have to learn to live with less. By the end of the decade, however, another response was gaining strength—one that combined a steady retreat from some of the heady liberal visions of the 1960s with a reinforced commitment to traditional ideas of economic growth, international power, and American virtue. 
766 •


POLITICS AND
DIPLOMACY AFTER
WATERGATE
 In the aftermath of Richard Nixon’s ­ignominious departure from office, many Americans wondered whether faith in the presidency, and in the government as a whole, could ever be restored. The administrations of the two presidents who succeeded Nixon did little to answer those questions.

The Ford Custodianship
 Gerald Ford inherited the presidency under difficult circumstances. He had to try to rebuild confidence in government in the wake of the Watergate scandals and to restore prosperity in the face of major economic difficulties. The new president’s effort to establish himself as a symbol of political integrity ­suffered a setback only a month after he took office, when he granted Richard Nixon “a full, free, and absolute pardon” for any crimes he may have committed during his presidency. The pardon angered a public eager to see Nixon face criminal charges and caused a decline in Ford’s popularity from which he never fully recovered. Nevertheless, most Americans considered Ford a decent man; his honesty and amiability did much to reduce the bitterness and acrimony of the Watergate years. The Ford administration enjoyed far less success in its effort to solve the problems of the economy. To curb inflation, the president called for largely ineffective voluntary efforts. After supporting high interest rates, opposing increased federal spending (through liberal use of his veto power), and resisting pressures for a tax reduction, Ford had to deal with a confounding economic mix of rising unemployment, high inflation, and slowing economic growth in 1974 and 1975 known as “stagflation.” While it occurred only during this twoyear period, it was synonymous with most of the economic troubles of the seventies.

TIME LINE
 Carter elected president 1978–1979 Camp David accords American hostages in Iran Soviet Union invades Afghanistan U.S. and China restore relations Three Mile Island nuclear accident

“Stagflation”
 Ford pardons Nixon Panama Canal treaties signed Apple introduces first personal computer

 U.S. boycotts Moscow Olympics Reagan elected president

 American hostages in Iran released Reagan wins tax and budget cuts AIDS first reported in U.S.

 Severe recession

 U.S. invades Grenada

 Reagan reelected

Reagan and
 Gorbachev meet





 Iran-contra scandal revealed

George H. W. Bush
 elected president

 Berlin Wall dismantled Communist regimes collapse



 U.S. troops in Panama

 Iraq invades Kuwait Los Angeles race riots

 Collapse of Soviet regime Persian Gulf War

 Clinton elected president

• 767


