86 • CHAPTER 4


 The Iroquois maintained their autonomy by trading successfully with both the French and the English and astutely played them against each other.

Anglo-French Conflicts
 As long as peace and stability in the North American interior lasted, English and French colonists coexisted without serious difficulty. But after the Glorious Revolution in England, a complicated series of Anglo-French wars erupted in Europe and continued intermittently for nearly eighty years, creating important repercussions in America. King William’s War (1689–1697) produced only a few, indecisive clashes between the English and the French in northern New England. Queen Anne’s War, which began in 1701 and continued for nearly twelve years, generated more substantial conflicts. The Treaty of Utrecht, which brought the conflict to a close in 1713, transferred substantial territory from the French to the English in North America, including Acadia (Nova Scotia) and Newfoundland. Two decades later, disputes over British trading rights in the Spanish colonies produced a conflict between England and Spain that soon grew into a much larger European war. The English colonists in America were drawn into the struggle, which they called King George’s War (1744–1748). New Englanders captured the French bastion at Louisbourg on Cape Breton Island in Nova Scotia, but the peace treaty that finally ended the conflict forced them to abandon it. In the aftermath of King George’s War, relations among the English, French, and Iroquois in North America quickly deteriorated. The Iroquois (in what appears to have been a major blunder) granted trading concessions in the interior to English merchants for the first time. The French feared (probably correctly) that the English were using the concessions as a first step toward expansion into French lands. They began in 1749 to construct new fortresses in the Ohio Valley. The English responded by increasing their military forces and building fortresses of their own. The balance of power that the Iroquois had carefully maintained for so long rapidly disintegrated. For the next five years, tensions between the English and the French increased. In the summer of 1754, the governor of Virginia sent a militia force (under the command of an inexperienced young colonel, George Washington) into the Ohio Valley to challenge Fort Necessity French expansion. Washington built a crude stockade (Fort Necessity) not far from France’s Fort Duquesne, on the site of what is now Pittsburgh. After the Virginians staged an unsuccessful attack on a French detachment, the French countered with an assault on Fort Necessity, trapping Washington and his soldiers inside. After one-third of them died in the fighting, Washington surrendered. The clash marked the beginning of the French and Indian War.

The Great War for the Empire
 The French and Indian War lasted nearly nine years, and it moved through three distinct phases. The first phase—from the Fort Necessity debacle in 1754 until the expansion of the war to Europe in 1756—was primarily a local, North American conflict. The Iroquois remained largely passive in the conflict. But virtually all the other tribes were allied with the French. They launched a series of raids on western English settlements. The English colonists fought to defend themselves against those raids. By late 1755, many English settlers along the frontier had withdrawn to the east of the Allegheny Mountains to escape the hostilities.

French and Indian War


THE EMPIRE IN TRANSITION
• 87 

 The second phase of the struggle began in 1756, when the Seven Years’ War began in Europe and beyond. (See “America in the World: The First Global War.”) Seven Years’ War The fighting now spread to the West Indies, India, and Europe itself. But the principal struggle remained the war in North America, where so far England had suffered nothing but frustration and defeat. Beginning in 1757, William Pitt, the English secretary William Pitt of state (and future prime minister), brought the war fully under British control. He planned military strategy, appointed commanders, and issued orders to the colonists. British commanders began forcibly enlisting colonists into the army (a practice known as impressment). Officers also seized supplies from local farmers and tradesmen and compelled colonists to offer shelter to British troops—all generally without compensation. The Americans resented these new impositions and firmly resisted them. By early 1758, the friction between the British authorities and the colonists was threatening to bring the war effort to a halt. Beginning in 1758, Pitt initiated the third and final phase of the war by relaxing many of the policies that Americans had found obnoxious. He agreed to reimburse the colonists for all supplies requisitioned by the army. He returned control over recruitment to the colonial assemblies. And he dispatched large numbers of additional British troops to America. These moves turned the tide of battle in England’s favor. The French had always been outnumbered by the British colonists. After 1756, moreover, the French suffered from a series of poor harvests and were unable to sustain their early military successes. By mid-1758, British regulars and colonial militias were seizing one French stronghold after another. Two brilliant English generals, Jeffrey Amherst and James Wolfe, captured the fortress at Louisbourg in July 1758; a few months later Fort Duquesne

FPO


 The fortress of Louisbourg, on Cape Breton Island in Nova Scotia, was one of the principal French outposts in eastern Canada during the French and Indian War. It took a British fleet of 157 ships nearly two months to force the French garrison to surrender. (© Private Collection/Peter Newark American Pictures/Bridgeman Images) THE SIEGE OF LOUISBOURG, 1758

AMERICA IN THE WORLD


The First Global War
The French and Indian War in North
 America was only a small part of a much larger conflict. Known in Europe as the Seven Years’ War, it was one of the longest, most widespread, and most important wars in modern history. The war thrust Great Britain into conflicts across Europe and North America. Winston Churchill once wrote of it as the first “world war.” In North America, the war was a result of tensions along the frontiers of the British Empire. But it arose more broadly from larger conflicts among the great powers in Europe. It began in the 1750s with what historians have called a “diplomatic revolution.” Well-established alliances between Britain and the Austro-Hungarian Empire and between France and Prussia collapsed, replaced by a new set of alliances setting Britain and Prussia against France and Austria. The instability that these changing alliances produced helped speed the European nations toward war. The Austrian-British alliance collapsed because Austria suffered a series of significant defeats at the hands of the Prussians. To the British government, these failures suggested that the Austro-Hungarian Empire was now too weak to help Britain balance French power. As a result, England launched a search for new partnerships with the rising powers of northern Germany, Austria’s enemies. In response, the Austrians sought an alliance with France to help protect them from the power of their former British allies. (One later result of this new alliance was the 1770 marriage of the future French king Louis XVI to the Austrian princess Marie Antoinette.) In the aftermath of these realignments, Austria sought again to defeat the Prussian-Hanover forces in Germany. In the process, Russia became concerned about the Austro-Hungarian 88 •

 Empire’s possible dominance in central Europe and allied itself with the British and the Prussians. These complicated realignments eventually led to the Seven Years’ War, which soon spread across much of the world. The war engaged not only most of the great powers in Europe, from England to Russia, but also the emerging colonial worlds—India, West Africa, the Caribbean, and the Philippines—as the powerful British navy worked to strip France, and eventually Spain, of its valuable colonial holdings. Like most modern conflicts, the Seven Years’ War was at heart a struggle for economic power. Colonial possessions, many European nations believed, were critical to their future wealth and well worth fighting for. The war’s outcome affected not only the future of America but also the distribution of power throughout much of the world. It destroyed the French navy and much of the French Empire, and it elevated Great Britain to undisputed preeminence among the colonizing powers—especially when, at the conclusion of the war, India and all of eastern North America fell firmly under English control. The war also reorganized the balance of power in Europe, with Britain now preeminent among the great powers and Prussia (later to become the core of modern Germany) rapidly rising in wealth and military power. The Seven Years’ War was not only one of the first great colonial wars but also one of the last great wars of religion, and it extended the dominance of Protestantism in Europe. In what is now Canada, the war replaced French with British rule and thus replaced Catholic with Protestant dominance. The Vatican, no longer a military power itself, had relied on the great Catholic empires—Spain, France, and AustriaHungary—as bulwarks of its power and influence. The shift of power t­oward Protestant

 This etching shows a fireworks display in Paris on February 10, 1763, to mark the end of the Seven Years’ War. (© Granger, NYC—All Rights Reserved.) CELEBRATING THE PEACE OF PARIS

 governments in Europe and North America weakened the Catholic Church and reduced its geopolitical influence. The conclusion of the Seven Years’ War strengthened Britain and Germany and weakened France. But it did not provide any lasting solution to the rivalries among the great colonial powers. In North America, a dozen years after the end of the conflict, the American Revolution—the origins of which were in many ways a direct result of the Seven Years’ War—stripped the British Empire of one of its most ­important and valuable colonial appendages. By the time the American Revolution came to an end,

 the French Revolution had sparked another lengthy period of war, culminating in the Napoleonic Wars of the early nineteenth century, which once again redrew the map of Europe and, for a while, the world.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. How did the Seven Years’ War change

 the balance of power among the nations of Europe? Who gained and who lost in the war? 2. Why is the Seven Years’ War described as one of the “most important wars in modern history”?

 fell without a fight. The next year, at the end of a siege of Quebec, the army of General Wolfe struggled up a hidden ravine under cover of darkness, surprised the larger forces of the Marquis de Montcalm, and defeated them in a battle in which both commanders were killed. The dramatic fall of Quebec on September 13, 1759, marked the beginning of the end of the American phase of the war. A year later, in September 1760, the French army formally surrendered to Amherst in Montreal. Peace finally came in 1763, with the • 89

90 • CHAPTER 4


 Peace of Paris, by which the French ceded to Great Britain some of their West Indian islands, most of their colonies in India and Canada, and all other French territory in North America east of the Mississippi. The French then ceded New Orleans and their claims west of the Mississippi to Spain, surrendering all title to the mainland of North America. The French and Indian War greatly expanded England’s territorial claims in the New World. At the same time, the cost of the war greatly enlarged Britain’s debt and substantially increased Effects of the Conflict British resentment of the Americans. English leaders were contemptuous of the colonists for what they considered American military ineptitude during the war; they were angry that the colonists had made so few financial contributions to a struggle waged, they believed, largely for American benefit; they were particularly bitter that colonial merchants had been selling food and other goods to the French in the West Indies throughout the conflict. All these factors combined to persuade many English leaders that a major reorganization of the empire would be necessary. London wanted increased authority over the colonies. The war had an equally profound effect on the American colonists. It was an experience that forced them, for the first time, to act in concert against a common foe. The 1758 return of authority to the colonial assemblies seemed to many Americans to confirm the illegitimacy of English interference in local affairs. For the Indians of the Ohio Valley, the British victory was disastrous. Those tribes that had allied themselves with the French had earned the enmity of the victorious English. The Iroquois Confederacy, which had not allied with the French, fared only slightly ­better. Consequences for Native Americans English officials saw the passivity of the Iroquois during the war as evidence of duplicity. In the aftermath of the peace settlement, the fragile Iroquois alliance with the British quickly unraveled. The tribes would continue to contest the English for control of the Ohio Valley for another fifty years, but were increasingly divided and increasingly outnumbered. They would seldom again be in a position to deal with their European rivals on terms of military or political equality.

THE NEW IMPERIALISM
 With the treaty of 1763, England found itself truly at peace for the first time in more than fifty years. As a result, the British government could now turn its attention to the organization of its empire. Saddled with enormous debts from the many years of war, England was desperately in need of new revenues. Responsible for vast holdings in the New World, the imperial government believed it must increase its administrative capacities in America. The result was a dramatic and, for England, disastrous redefinition of the colonial relationship.

Burdens of Empire
 The experience of the French and Indian War should have suggested that increasing imperial control over the colonies would not be easy. Not only had the resistance of the colonists forced Pitt to relax his policies in 1758, but the colonial assemblies continued to defy imperial trade regulations and other British demands. But the most immediate Britain’s Staggering War Debt ­problem for London was its staggering war debt. Landlords and merchants in England were objecting strenuously to any further tax increases, and the colonial assemblies had repeatedly demonstrated their unwillingness to pay for the war effort. Many officials in England believed that only by taxing the Americans directly could the empire effectively meet its financial needs.

THE EMPIRE IN TRANSITION
• 91 

 At this crucial moment in Anglo-American relations, the government of England was thrown into turmoil by the 1760 accession to the throne of George III. He George the Third brought two particularly unfortunate qualities to the position. First, he was determined to reassert the authority of the monarchy. He removed from power the relatively stable ­coalition of Whigs that had governed for much of the century and replaced it with a new and very unstable coalition of his own. The weak new ministries that emerged as a result each lasted in office an average of only about two years. Second, the king had serious intellectual and psychological limitations. He suffered, apparently, from a rare mental disease that produced intermittent bouts of insanity. (Indeed, in the last years of his long reign he was, according to most accounts, unable to perform any official

HUDSON’S BAY COMPANY


QUEBEC
Quebec
.
 eR nc re

MAINE
(Mass.)


St.


La


 w

Superio
Lake
 r Montreal

Y
R
 ny

 e Eri

Kingston
Poughkeepsie


.


 PENNSYLVANIA a R.

TA


R.


N


IA


H
C
A


L


C


A


P
P
A


Cu
 m

Plymouth
Providence
Newport


R.I.


NEW JERSEY


ATLANTIC
OCEAN


 es Jam R. Richmond Williamsburg

Mis


Fayetteville


Norfolk


NORTH
CAROLINA
.


Ten
 n

 pi R .

CONN.


DELAWARE


Petersburg
Roa
 no ke R .

 rR

SPANISH
LOUISIANA


MASS.
Hartford


Burlington
New Castle
Po Baltimore
 tom Dover . Annapolis

 ea eF ap

 siss ip

Bennington


VIRGINIA


 and R.

R.
 see es

Falmouth
Portsmouth
Gloucester
Boston


N
Shena
 n do M O ah U R

Ohio R.


Vincennes


 l ber

N.H.


New Haven
Southampton
New York
Perth Amboy
Trenton


R.


St. Louis


Philadelphia


.


 ac

Wabash R.


Ill
 in ois

Fort
Duquesne


 n

Reading


I


St. Joseph


Susq N S
 ueh an

 e Lak

R.


Albany


Fort
Niagara


 he

S H
T I
I
Fort Detroit
B R


Lake
Champlain


Fort
Frontenac


 io Fort M Ontar ohawk R. Lake Stanwix

All
 eg

Lake Mic
 h

 igan

 ro n Hu

E


T


I


O


Connecticut


 e ak

La Baye


R


R


T


Hudson R.


L


R


Delaware R


Fort
Michimilimackinac


Edenton


NON-INDIAN
SETTLEMENT


Greenville
New
Bern
Portsmouth


Before 1700


Wilmington


SOUTH
CAROLINA
DISPUTED TERRITORY
(Claimed by Spain and Britain)


Camden
Columbia
Sant
 ee R .

R
 ah nn

Augusta Sa Ashley
 va R.

GEORGIA


 Frontier line Proclamation line of 1763 Fort

Cooper R.
Charles Town


.


Al


1700–1763


Kingston


 tam

 ah a

Savannah




R.




250 mi


500 km


 Provincial capital

 This map shows the thirteen colonies at the end of the Seven Years’ War. It shows the line of settlement established by the Proclamation of 1763 (the red line), as well as the extent of actual settlement in that year (the blue line). Note that in the middle colonies (North Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, and southern Pennsylvania), settlement had already reached the red line—and in one small area of western Pennsylvania moved beyond it—by the time of the Proclamation of 1763. Note also the string of forts established beyond the Proclamation line. • How do the forts help explain the efforts of the British to restrict settlement? And how does the extent of actual settlement help explain why it was so difficult for the British to enforce their restrictions? THE THIRTEEN COLONIES IN 1763

92 • CHAPTER 4


 functions.) Yet even when George III was lucid, which was most of the time in the 1760s and 1770s, he was painfully immature and insecure. The king’s personality, therefore, contributed both to the instability and to the rigidity of the British government during these critical years. More directly responsible for the problems that soon emerged with the colonies, George Grenville ­ however, was George Grenville, whom the king made prime minister in 1763. Grenville shared the prevailing opinion within Britain that the colonists should be compelled to pay a part of the cost of defending and administering the empire.

The British and the Tribes
 With the defeat of the French, frontiersmen from the English colonies began immediately to move over the mountains and into tribal lands in the upper Ohio Valley. An alliance of Indian tribes, under the Ottawa chieftain Pontiac, struck back. Fearing that an escalation of the fighting Proclamation of 1763 might threaten western trade, the British government—in the Proclamation of 1763—forbade settlers to advance beyond the Appalachian Mountains. Many Indian groups supported the Proclamation as the best bargain available to them. The Cherokee, in particular, worked actively to hasten the drawing of the boundary, hoping finally to put an end to white movements into their lands. Relations between the western tribes and the British improved for a time, partly as a result of the work of the sympathetic Indian superintendents the British appointed. In the end, however, the Proclamation of 1763 was ineffective. White settlers continued to swarm across the boundary and to claim lands farther and farther into the Ohio Valley. The British authorities failed to enforce limits to the expansion. In 1768, new agreements with the western tribes pushed the permanent boundary farther west. But these treaties and subsequent ones also failed to stop the white advance.

 Battles over Trade and Taxes The Grenville ministry tried to increase its authority in the colonies in other ways as well. Regular British troops were stationed permanently in America, and under the Mutiny Act of 1765 the colonists were required to help provision and maintain the army. Ships of the British navy patrolled American waters to search for smugglers. The customs service was reorganized and enlarged. Royal officials were required to take up their colonial posts in person instead of sending substitutes. Colonial manufacturing was restricted so that it would not compete with rapidly expanding industries in Great Britain. The Sugar Act of 1764 raised the duty on sugar while lowering the duty on molasses. Sugar and Currency Acts It also established new vice-admiralty courts in America to try accused smugglers—thus cutting them off from sympathetic local juries. The Currency Act of 1764 required that the colonial assemblies stop issuing paper money. At first, it was difficult for the colonists to resist these unpopular new laws. That was partly because Americans continued to harbor as many grievances against one another as they did against the authorities in London. In 1763, for example, a band of Pennsylvania frontiersmen known as the Paxton Boys descended on Philadelphia to demand tax relief and financial support for their defense against Indians. Bloodshed was averted only by concessions from the colonial assembly. In 1771, a small-scale civil war broke out in North Carolina when the Paxton Boys and Regulators “Regulators,” farmers of the interior, organized and armed themselves to resist high taxes. The colonial governor appointed sheriffs to enforce the levies. An army of militiamen, most of them from the eastern counties, crushed the Regulator revolt. Mutiny Act

THE EMPIRE IN TRANSITION
• 93 

 The unpopularity of the Grenville program helped the colonists overcome their internal conflicts and see that the policies from London were a threat to all Americans. Northern merchants would suffer from restraints on their commerce. The closing of the West to land speculation and fur trading enraged many colonists. Others were angered by the restriction of opportunities for manufacturing. Southern planters, in debt to English merchants, would be unable to ease their debts by speculating in western land. Small farmers would suffer from the abolition of paper money, which had been the source of most of their loans. Workers in towns faced the prospect of narrowing opportunities, particularly because of the restraints on manufacturing and currency. Everyone stood to suffer from increased taxes. Most Americans soon found ways to live with the new British laws without terrible economic hardship. But their political grievances remained. Americans were accustomed to wide latitude in self-government. They believed that colonial assemblies had the sole right to control appropriations for the costs of government within the colonies. By attempting to raise extensive revenues directly from the public, the British government was challenging the basis of colonial political power.

STIRRINGS OF REVOLT
 By the mid-1760s, a hardening of positions had begun in both England and America. The result was a progression of events that, more rapidly than imagined, destroyed the British Empire in America.

The Stamp Act Crisis
 Grenville could not have devised a better method for antagonizing and unifying the colonies than the Stamp Act of 1765. Unlike the Sugar Act of a year earlier, The Stamp Act which affected only a few New England merchants, the new tax fell on everyone. It levied taxes on every printed document in the colonies: newspapers, almanacs, pamphlets, deeds, wills, licenses. British officials were soon collecting more than ten times as much revenue in America as they had been before 1763. More alarming than these taxes, however, was the precedent they seemed to create. In the past, taxes and duties on colonial trade had always been designed to regulate commerce. The Stamp Act, however, was clearly an attempt by England to raise revenue from the colonies without the consent of the colonial assemblies. Few colonists believed that they could do anything more than grumble until the Virginia House of Burgesses aroused Americans to action. Patrick Henry made a dramatic speech to the House in May 1765, concluding with a vague prediction that if present policies were not revised, George III, like earlier tyrants, might lose his head. Amid shocked cries of “Treason!” Henry introduced a set of resolutions (only some of which the assembly passed) declaring that Americans possessed the same rights as the English, especially the right to be taxed only by their “Virginia Resolves” own representatives; that Virginians should pay no taxes except those voted by the Virginia assembly; and that anyone advocating the right of Parliament to tax Virginians should be deemed an enemy of the colony. Henry’s resolutions were printed and circulated as the “Virginia Resolves.”

CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, TESTIMONY AGAINST
THE STAMP ACT
(1766)  In 1765 Parliament passed the first internal tax on the colonists, known as the Stamp Act. Benjamin Franklin was a colonial agent in London at the time, and as colonial opposition to the act grew, he found himself representing these views to the British government. In his testimony from Parliament he describes the role of taxes in Pennsylvania and the ­economic r­ elationship between the colonies and the mother country. Q. What is your name, and place of abode? A. Franklin, of Philadelphia. Q. Do the Americans pay any considerable taxes among themselves? A. Certainly many, and very heavy taxes. Q. What are the present taxes in Pennsylvania, laid by the laws of the colony? A. There are taxes on all estates, real and personal; a poll tax; a tax on all offices, professions, trades, and businesses, ­according to their profits; an excise on all wine, rum, and other spirit; and a duty of ten pounds per head on all Negroes imported, with some other duties. Q. For what purposes are those taxes laid? A. For the support of the civil and military establishments of the country, and to discharge the heavy debt contracted in the last [Seven Years’] war. . . . Q. Are not all the people very able to pay those taxes? A. No. The frontier counties, all along the continent, have been frequently ravaged by the enemy and greatly impoverished, are able to pay very little tax. . . . Q. Are not the colonies, from their circumstances, very able to pay the stamp duty? A. In my opinion there is not gold and silver enough in the colonies to pay the stamp duty for one year. 94 •

Q.
Don’t you know that the money arising from the stamps was all to be laid out in America? A. I know it is appropriated by the act to the American service; but it will be spent in the conquered colonies, where the soldiers are, not in the colonies that pay it. Q. Do you think it right that America should be protected by this country and pay no part of the expense? A. That is not the case. The colonies raised, clothed, and paid, during the last war, near 25,000 men, and spent many millions. Q. Were you not reimbursed by Parliament? A. We were only reimbursed what, in your opinion, we had advanced beyond our proportion, or beyond what might reasonably be expected from us; and it was a very small part of what we spent. Pennsylvania, in particular, disbursed about 500,000 pounds, and the reimbursements, in the whole, did not exceed 60,000 pounds. . . . Q. Do you think the people of America would submit to pay the stamp duty, if it was moderated? A. No, never, unless compelled by force of arms. . . . Q. What was the temper of America towards Great Britain before the year 1763? A. The best in the world. They submitted willingly to the government of the Crown, and paid, in all their courts, obedience to acts of Parliament. . . . Q. What is your opinion of a future tax, ­imposed on the same principle with that of the Stamp Act? How would the Americans receive it? A. Just as they do this. They would not pay it. Q. Have not you heard of the resolutions of this House, and of the House of Lords, ­asserting the right of Parliament relating to America, including a power to tax the ­people there? 
A.
Yes, I have heard of such resolutions. Q. What will be the opinion of the Americans on those resolutions? A. They will think them unconstitutional and unjust. Q. Was it an opinion in America before 1763 that the Parliament had no right to lay taxes and duties there? A. I never heard any objection to the right of laying duties to regulate commerce; but a right to lay internal taxes was never supposed to be in Parliament, as we are not represented there. Q. Did the Americans ever dispute the controlling power of Parliament to regulate the commerce? A. No. Q. Can anything less than a military force carry the Stamp Act into execution? A. I do not see how a military force can be applied to that purpose. Q. Why may it not? A. Suppose a military force sent into America; they will find nobody in arms; what are they then to do? They cannot force a man to take stamps who chooses to do without them. They will not find a rebellion; they may indeed make one. Q. If the act is not repealed, what do you think will be the consequences? A. A total loss of the respect and affection the people of America bear to this country, and of all the commerce that ­depends on that respect and affection. Q. How can the commerce be affected? A. You will find that, if the act is not ­repealed, they will take very little of your manufactures in a short time. Q. Is it in their power to do without them? A. I think they may very well do without them. Q. Is it their interest not to take them? A. The goods they take from Britain are ­either necessaries, mere conveniences, or superfluities. The first, as cloth, etc., with a little industry they can make at 
 home; the second they can do without till they are able to provide them among themselves; and the last, which are mere articles of fashion, purchased and consumed because of the fashion in a respected country; but will now be detested and rejected. The people have already struck off, by general agreement, the use of all goods fashionable in mourning. Q. If the Stamp Act should be repealed, would it induce the assemblies of America to acknowledge the right of Parliament to tax them, and would they erase their resolutions [against the Stamp Act]? A. No, never. Q. Is there no means of obliging them to erase those resolutions? A. None that I know of; they will never do it, unless compelled by force of arms. Q. Is there a power on earth that can force them to erase them? A. No power, how great so ever, can force men to change their opinions. . . . Q. What used to be the pride of the Americans? A. To indulge in the fashions and manufactures of Great Britain. Q. What is now their pride? A. To wear their old clothes over again, till they can make new ones. UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE 1. What kind of taxes did colonists pay

 a­ ccording to Franklin? What did the ­interviewer seem to think of the colonists’ tax burden? What disagreements existed between Franklin and his interviewer on the purpose, legality, and ­feasibility of the stamp tax? 2. How did Franklin characterize the Britishcolonial relationship prior to 1763? 3. What colonial response to the Stamp Act and other “internal taxes” did Franklin predict? What, if anything, could Parliament do to enforce the ­colonists’ compliance?

 Source: The Parliamentary History of England (London, 1813), vol. XVI, pp. 138–159; in Charles Morris, The Great Republic by the Master Historians, vol. II (R.S. Belcher Co., 1902).

• 95


96 • CHAPTER 4


 In Massachusetts at about the same time, James Otis persuaded his fellow members of the colonial assembly to call an intercolonial congress to take action against the new tax. And in October 1765, the Stamp Act Congress, as it was called, met in New York with delegates from nine colonies. In a petition to the British government, the congress denied that the colonies could rightfully be taxed except through their own provincial assemblies. Across the ocean, colonial agent Benjamin Franklin articulated such grievances before Parliament. (See “Consider the Source: Testimony against the Stamp Act.”) Meanwhile, in the summer of 1765, mobs were rising up in several colonial cities against the Stamp Act. The largest was in Boston, where men belonging to the newly organized Sons of Liberty terrorized stamp agents and burned stamps. The mob also attacked such supposedly pro-British aristocrats as the lieutenant governor, Thomas Hutchinson (who had privately opposed passage of the Stamp Act but who felt obliged to support it once it became law). Hutchinson’s elegant house was pillaged and virtually destroyed. The crisis finally subsided largely because England backed down. The authorities in London were less affected by the political protests than by economic pressure. Many New Stamp Act Repealed Englanders had stopped buying English goods to protest the Sugar Act of 1764, and the Stamp Act caused the boycott to spread. With pressure from English merchants, Parliament—under a new prime minister, the Marquis of Rockingham— repealed the unpopular law on March 18, 1766. To satisfy his strong and vociferous opponents, Rockingham also pushed through the Declaratory Act, which confirmed parliamentary authority over the colonies “in all cases whatsoever.” But in their rejoicing over the Stamp Act repeal, most Americans paid little attention to this sweeping declaration of power.

Internal Rebellions
 The conflicts with Britain were not the only uprisings emerging in the turbulent years of the 1760s. In addition to the Stamp Act crisis and other challenges to London, there were internal rebellions that had their roots in the class system in New York and New England. In the Hudson Valley in New York, great estates had grown up, in which owners had rented out their land to small farmers. The Revolutionary fervor of the time led many of these tenants to demand ownership of the land they worked. To emphasize their determination, they stopped paying rents. The rebellion soon failed, but other challenges continued. In Vermont, which still was governed by New York, insurgent farmers challenged landowners (many of them the same owners whom tenants had challenged on the Hudson) by taking up arms and demanding ownership of the land they worked. Ethan Allen (later a hero of the Revolutionary War and himself a land speculator) took up the cause of the Green Mountain farmers and accused the landowners of trying to “enslave a free people.” Allen eventually succeeded in making Vermont into a separate state, which broke up some of the large estates.

The Townshend Program
 When the Rockingham government’s policy of appeasement met substantial opposition in England, the king dismissed the ministry and replaced it with a new government led by the aging but still powerful William Pitt, who was now Lord Chatham. Chatham had in the past been sympathetic toward American interests. Once in office, however, he was at times so incapacitated by mental illness that leadership of his administration fell to the chancellor of the exchequer, Charles Townshend.

THE EMPIRE IN TRANSITION
• 97 

 With the Stamp Act repealed, the greatest remaining American grievance involved the Mutiny (or Quartering) Act of 1765, which required colonists to shelter and supply British troops. The colonists objected not so much to the actual burden as to being required by London to do so. The Massachusetts and New York assemblies went so far as to refuse to grant the mandated supplies to the troops. Townshend responded in 1767 by disbanding the New York Assembly until the colonists agreed to obey the Mutiny Act. By singling out New York, he believed, he would avoid antagonizing all the colonies at once. He also imposed new taxes (known as the Townshend Duties) on various goods imported to the colonies from England—lead, paint, Townshend Duties paper, and tea. Townshend assumed that since these were taxes purely on “external” transactions (imports from overseas), as opposed to the internal transactions the Stamp Act had taxed, the colonists would not object. But all the colonies resented the suspension of the New York Assembly, believing it to be a threat to every colonial government. And all the colonies rejected Townshend’s careful distinction between external and internal taxation. Townshend also established a board of customs commissioners in America. The new commissioners established their headquarters in Boston. They virtually ended smuggling in Boston (although smugglers continued to carry on a busy trade in other colonial seaports). The Boston merchants—angry that the new commission was diverting the lucrative smuggling trade elsewhere—helped organize a boycott of British goods that were subject to the Townshend Duties. Merchants in Philadelphia and New York joined them in a nonimportation agreement in 1768, and later some southern Nonimportation Agreement ­merchants and planters also agreed to cooperate. Throughout the colonies, American homespun and other domestic products became suddenly fashionable. Late in 1767, Charles Townshend died. In March 1770, the new prime minister, Lord North, hoping to end the American boycott, repealed all the Townshend Duties except the tea tax.

The Boston Massacre
 Before news of the repeal reached America, an event in Massachusetts inflamed colonial opinion. The harassment of the new customs commissioners in Boston had grown so intense that the British government had placed four regiments of regular troops in the city. Many of the poorly paid British soldiers looked for jobs in their off-duty hours and thus competed with local workers. Clashes between the two groups were frequent. On the night of March 5, 1770, a mob of dockworkers, “liberty boys,” and others began pelting the sentries at the customs house with rocks and snowballs. Hastily, Captain Thomas Preston of the British regiment lined up several of his men in front of the building to protect it. There was some scuffling; one of the soldiers was knocked down; and in the midst of it all, apparently, several British soldiers fired into the crowd, killing five people. This murky incident, almost certainly the result of panic and confusion, was quickly transformed by local resistance leaders into the “Boston The Boston Massacre in Popular Culture Massacre.” It became the subject of such lurid (and inaccurate) accounts as the widely circulated pamphlet Innocent Blood Crying to God from the Streets of Boston. A famous engraving by Paul Revere portrayed the massacre as a calculated assault on a peaceful crowd. The British soldiers, tried before a jury of Bostonians, were found guilty only of manslaughter and given token punishment. But colonial pamphlets and newspapers convinced many Americans that the soldiers were guilty of official murder. The leading figure in fomenting public outrage over the Boston Massacre was Samuel Adams. England, he argued, had become a morass of sin and corruption; only

98 • CHAPTER 4


THE BOSTON MASSACRE
(1770), BY PAUL REVERE This sensationalized engraving of the conflict between British troops and Boston laborers is one of many important propaganda documents, by Revere and others, for the Patriot cause in the 1770s. Among the victims of the massacre listed by Revere was Crispus Attucks, probably the first black man to die in the struggle for American independence. (The Library of Congress) 
 in America did public virtue survive. In 1772, he proposed the creation of a “­ committee of correspondence” in Boston to publicize the grievances against England. Other colonies followed Massachusetts’s lead, and a loose intercolonial network of political organizations was soon established that kept the spirit of dissent alive through the 1770s.

“Committee of Correspondence”


The Philosophy of Revolt
 Although a superficial calm settled on the colonies after the Boston Massacre, the crises of the 1760s had helped arouse enduring ideological challenges to English authority and had produced powerful instruments for publicizing colonial grievances. Gradually a political outlook gained a following in America that would ultimately serve to justify revolt. The ideas that would support the Revolution emerged from many sources. Some were drawn from religious (particularly Puritan) sources or from the political experiences of the colonies. Others came from abroad. Most important, perhaps, were the “radical” ideas

THE EMPIRE IN TRANSITION
• 99 

 of the political opposition in Great Britain. Some were Scots, who considered the English state tyrannical. Others were embittered “country Whigs,” who felt excluded from power and considered the existing system corrupt and oppressive. Drawing from some of the great philosophical minds of earlier generations—most notably John Locke—these English dissidents framed a powerful argument against their government. Central to this emerging ideology was a new concept of what government should be. Because humans were inherently corrupt and selfish, government was necessary to protect individuals from the evil in one another. But because any government was run by corruptible leaders, the people needed safeguards against its possible abuses of power. Most people in both England and America considered the English constitution the best system ever devised to meet these necessities. By distributing power among the three elements of society—the monarchy, the aristocracy, and the common people—the English political system had ensured that no individual or group could exercise unchecked authority. Yet by the mid-seventeenth century, dissidents in both England and America had become convinced that the constitution was in danger. A single center of power—the king and his ministers—was becoming so powerful that it could not be effectively checked. Such arguments found little sympathy in most of England. The English constitution was not a written document or a fixed set of unchangeable rules. It was a general sense of the “way things are done,” and most people in England were willing to accept changes in it. Americans, by contrast, drew from their experience with colonial charters, in which the shape and powers of government were permanently inscribed on paper. They resisted the idea of a flexible, changing set of basic principles. One basic principle, Americans believed, was the right of people to be taxed only with their own consent—a belief that gradually took shape in “No Taxation without Representation” the popular slogan “No taxation without representation.” Whatever the nature of a tax, it could not be levied without the consent of the colonists themselves. This clamor about “representation” made little sense to the English. According to English constitutional theory, members of Parliament did not represent individuals or particular ­geographical areas. Instead, each member represented the interests of the whole nation and indeed the whole empire. The many boroughs of England that had no representative in Parliament, the whole of Ireland, and the colonies thousands of miles away—all were thus represented in the Parliament at London, even though they elected no representatives of their own. This was the theory of “virtual” representation. But Americans, drawing from their experiences with their town meetings and their colonial assemblies, believed in “actual” representation. Every community was entitled to its own representative, elected by the people of that community. Since the colonists had none of their own representatives in Parliament, it followed that they were not represented there. Americans believed that the colonial ­assemblies played the same role within the colonies as Parliament did within England. The empire, the Americans argued, was a sort of federation of commonwealths, each with its own legislative body, all tied together by loyalty to the king. Such ideas illustrated a fundamental difference of opinion between England and America over the question of where ultimate power lay. By arguing that Parliament had the right to legislate for the empire as a whole but that only the provincial assemblies could legislate for the individual colonies, Americans were in effect arguing for a division of Sovereignty Debated sovereignty. Parliament would be sovereign in some matters, the assemblies in others. To the British, such an argument was absurd. In any system of government there must be a single, ultimate authority. And since the empire was, in their view, a single, undivided unit, there could be only one authority within it: the English government of king and Parliament.

PATTERNS OF POPULAR CULTURE


Taverns in Revolutionary
Massachusetts
 In colonial Massachusetts, as in many other American colonies in the 1760s and 1770s, taverns (or “public houses,” as they were often known) were crucial to the development of popular resistance to British rule. The Puritan culture of New England created some resistance to taverns, and reformers tried to regulate or close them to reduce the problems caused by “public drunkenness,” “lewd behavior,” and “anarchy.” But as the commercial life of the colonies expanded and more people began living in towns and cities, taverns became a central institution in American social life—and eventually in its political life as well. Taverns were appealing, of course, because they provided alcoholic drinks in a culture where the craving for alcohol— and the extent of drunkenness—was very high. But taverns had other attractions as well. They were one of the few places where people could meet and talk openly in public; indeed, many colonists considered the life of the tavern as the only vaguely democratic experience available to them. The tavern was a mostly male institution, just as politics was considered a mostly male concern. And so the fusion of male camaraderie and political discourse emerged naturally out of the tavern culture. As the Revolutionary crisis deepened, taverns and pubs became the central ­meeting places for airing the ideas that ­fueled resistance to British policies. Educated and uneducated men alike joined in 100 •

 a­nimated discussions of events. Those who could not read—and there were many—could learn about the contents of Revolutionary pamphlets from listening to tavern conversations. They could join in the discussion of the new republican ideas emerging in America by participating in tavern celebrations of, for example, the anniversaries of resistance to the Stamp Act. Those anniversaries inspired elaborate toasts in public houses throughout the colonies. In an age before wide distribution of newspapers, taverns and tavernkeepers were important sources of information about the political and social turmoil of the time. Taverns were also the settings for political events. In 1770, for example, a report circulated through the taverns of Danvers, Massachusetts, about a local man who was continuing to sell tea despite the colonial boycott. The Sons of Liberty brought the seller to the Bell Tavern and persuaded him to sign a confession and apology before a crowd of defiant men in the public room. Almost all politicians who wanted any real contact with the public found it necessary to visit taverns in colonial Massachusetts. Samuel Adams spent considerable time in the public houses of Boston, where he sought to encourage resistance to British rule while taking care to drink moderately so as not to erode his stature as a leader. His cousin John Adams, although somewhat more skeptical of taverns and more sensitive to the vices they encouraged, also

 r­ ecognized their political value. In taverns, he once said, “bastards and legislatores are frequently begotten.”

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. Why were taverns so important in edu-

 cating colonists about the relationship with Britain? 2. What gathering places today serve the same purposes as taverns did in colonial America?

TAVERNS AND POLITICS
The Green Dragon Tavern 
 is where protesters planned the Boston Tea Party. (© Granger, NYC—All Rights Reserved.)

Sites of Resistance
 Colonists kept the growing spirit of resistance alive in many ways, but most of all through writing and talking. Dissenting leaflets, pamphlets, and books circulated widely through the colonies. In towns and cities, men gathered in churches, schools, town squares, and, above all, taverns to discuss politics. Taverns were also places where resistance pamphlets and leaflets could be distributed and where meetings for the planning of protests and demonstrations could be held. Massachusetts had the most elaborately developed tavern culture, which was perhaps one reason why the spirit of resistance grew more quickly there than anywhere else. (See “Patterns of Popular Culture: Taverns in Revolutionary Massachusetts.”) The apparent calm in America in the 1770s hid a growing sense of resentment about the continued enforcement of the Navigation Acts. Popular anger was visible in occasional acts of rebellion. At one point, colonists seized a British revenue ship on Gaspée Incident the lower Delaware River. In 1772, angry residents of Rhode Island boarded the British schooner Gaspée, set it afire, and sank it.

The Tea Excitement
 The Revolutionary fervor of the 1760s intensified as a result of a new act of Parliament— one that involved the business of selling tea. In 1773, Britain’s East India Company (on the verge of bankruptcy) was sitting on large stocks of tea that it could not sell in England. In an effort to save it, the government passed the Tea Act of 1773, which gave The Tea Act the company the right to export its merchandise directly to the colonies without paying any of the regular taxes that were imposed on colonial merchants, who had traditionally served as the intermediaries in such transactions. With these privileges, the company could undersell American merchants and monopolize the colonial tea trade. The act angered influential colonial merchants and, more important, revived American passions about the issue of taxation without representation. The law provided no new tax on tea. But the original Townshend duty on the commodity survived; and the East India Company was now exempt from paying it. Lord North had assumed that most colonists would welcome the new law because it would reduce the price of tea to consumers by removing the intermediaries. But resistance leaders in America argued that the law, in effect, represented an unconstitutional tax on American merchants. The colonists responded by boycotting tea. • 101

102 • CHAPTER 4


 Unlike earlier protests, most of which had involved relatively small numbers of people, the tea boycott mobilized large segments of the population. It also helped link the colonies together in a common experience of mass popular protest. Particularly important to the movement were the activities of colonial women, who led the boycott. The Daughters of Daughters of Liberty Liberty—a recently formed women’s patriotic organization—­proclaimed, “rather than Freedom, we’ll part with our Tea.” In the last weeks of 1773, with strong popular support, some colonial leaders made plans to prevent the East India Company from landing its cargoes. In Philadelphia and New York, determined colonists kept the tea from leaving the company’s ships, and in Charles Town, South Carolina, they stored it away in a public warehouse. In Boston, local patriots staged a spectacular drama. On the evening of December 16, 1773, three companies of fifty men each, masquerading as Mohawk Indians, went aboard three The Boston “Tea Party” ships, broke open the tea chests, and heaved them into the harbor. As the electrifying news of the Boston “tea party” spread, colonists in other seaports staged similar acts of resistance. Parliament retaliated in four acts of 1774: closing the port of Boston, drastically reducing the powers of self-government in Massachusetts, permitting royal officers in America to be tried for crimes in other colonies or in England, and providing for the quartering of troops by the colonists. These Coercive Acts were more widely known in America as the “Intolerable Acts.” The Coercive Acts backfired. Far from isolating Massachusetts, they made it a m ­ artyr in the eyes of residents of other colonies and sparked new resistance up and down the coast. Colonial legislatures passed a series of resolves supporting Massachusetts. Consequences of the Coercive Acts Women’s groups mobilized to extend the boycotts of British goods and to create substitutes for the tea, textiles, and other commodities they were shunning. In Edenton, North Carolina, fifty-one women signed an agreement in October 1774 declaring their “sincere adherence” to the anti-British resolutions of their provincial assembly and proclaiming their duty to do “every thing as far as lies in our power” to support the “publick good.”

COOPERATION AND WAR
 Beginning in 1765, colonial leaders developed a variety of organizations for converting popular discontent into action—organizations that in time formed the basis for an independent government.

New Sources of Authority
 The passage of authority from the royal government to the colonists themselves began on the local level. In colony after colony, local institutions responded to the resistance movement by simply seizing authority. At times, entirely new institutions emerged. The most effective of these new groups were the committees of correspondence. Virginia established the first intercolonial committees of correspondence, which helped make possible continuous cooperation among the colonies. After the royal governor dissolved the assembly in 1774, colonists met in the Raleigh Tavern at Williamsburg, declared that the Intolerable Acts menaced the liberties of every colony, and issued a call for a Continental Congress.

THE EMPIRE IN TRANSITION
• 103 

 Delegates from all the colonies except Georgia were present when, in September 1774, the First Continental Congress convened in Philadelphia. They made The First Continental Congress five major decisions. First, they rejected a plan for a colonial union under British authority. Second, they endorsed a relatively moderate statement of grievances, which addressed the king as “Most Gracious Sovereign,” but which also included a demand for the repeal of all oppressive legislation passed since 1763. Third, they approved a series of resolutions recommending that military preparations be made for defense against possible attack by the British troops in Boston. Fourth, they agreed to a series of boycotts that they hoped would stop all trade with Great Britain, and they formed a “Continental Association” to see that these agreements were enforced. Fifth, the delegates agreed to meet again the following spring. During the winter, the Parliament in London debated proposals for conciliating the colonists, and early in 1775 Lord North finally won approval for a series of measures known as the Conciliatory Propositions. Parliament proposed that the colonies would tax themselves at Parliament’s demand. With this offer, Lord North hoped to separate the American moderates, whom he believed represented the views of the majority, from the extremist minority. But his offer was too little and too late. It did not reach America until after the first shots of war had been fired.

Lexington and Concord
 For months, the farmers and townspeople of Massachusetts had been gathering arms and ammunition and preparing “minutemen” to fight on a moment’s notice. The “Minutemen” Continental Congress had approved preparations for a defensive war, and the citizensoldiers waited only for an aggressive move by the British regulars in Boston. There, General Thomas Gage, commanding the British garrison, considered his army too small to do anything without reinforcements. He resisted the advice General Thomas Gage of less cautious officers, who assured him that the Americans would back down quickly before any show of British force. When General Gage received orders to arrest the rebel leaders Sam Adams and John Hancock, known to be in the vicinity of Lexington, he still hesitated. But when he heard that the minutemen had stored a large supply of gunpowder in Concord (eighteen miles from Boston), he decided to act. On the night of April 18, 1775, he sent a detachment of about 1,000 men out toward Lexington, hoping to surprise the colonials and seize the illegal supplies without bloodshed. But Patriots in Boston were watching the British movements closely, and during the night two horsemen, William Dawes and Paul Revere, rode out to warn the villages and farms. When the redcoats arrived in Lexington the next day, several dozen minutemen awaited them on the town common. Shots were fired and minutemen fell; eight were killed and ten wounded. Advancing to Concord, the British discovered that the Americans had hastily removed most of the powder supply. All along the road back to Boston, the British were harassed by the gunfire of farmers hiding behind trees, rocks, and stone walls. By the end of the day, the British had lost almost three times as many men as the Americans. The first shots—the “shots heard ’round the world,” as Americans later called them—had been fired. But who had fired them first? According to one of the minutemen at Lexington, the British commander, Major Thomas Pitcairn, had shouted to the colonists on his arrival, “Disperse, ye rebels!” When they ignored him, he ordered his troops to fire. British officers and soldiers claimed that the minutemen had fired first. Whatever the truth, the rebels succeeded in circulating their account well ahead of the British version, adorning it with tales of British atrocities. The effect was to rally thousands of colonists to the rebel cause.

104 • CHAPTER 4


 Paul Revere’s ride, night of April 18, 1775

North Bridge
 British return to Boston, April 19 (same day) Concord Su April 19, 1775 db u

 William Dawes’s ride, April 18, 1775 Revere captured

TROOP MOVEMENTS
 American forces British forces BATTLES AND ENTRENCHMENTS American victory British victory American entrenchment Road

R.
 ry

Lexington
April 19, 1775
 Dawes returns to Boston

Medford
Arlington


.
 cR sti My

Ch


Charlestown


 es R. arl

Bunker Hill and
 Breed’s Hill June 17, 1775

North
Church
Boston




Boston
Harbor


3 mi


6 km


Brookline


Roxbury


THE BATTLES OF LEXINGTON AND CONCORD, 1775
This map shows the fabled series of events that led to the first battle of the American Revolution. On the night of April 18, 1775, Paul Revere and William Dawes rode out from Boston to warn the outlying towns of the approach of British troops. Revere was captured just west of Lexington, but Dawes escaped and returned to Boston. The next morning, British forces moved out of Boston toward Lexington, where they met armed American minutemen on the Lexington common and exchanged fire. The British dispersed the Americans in Lexington. But they next moved on to Concord, where they encountered more armed minutemen, clashed again, and were driven back toward Boston. All along their line of march, they were harassed by riflemen. • What impact did the Battles of Lexington and Concord (and the later Battle of Bunker Hill, also shown on this map) have on colonial sentiment toward the British? 
 It was not immediately clear at the time that the skirmishes at Lexington and Concord were the first battles of a war. But whether people recognized it at the time or not, the War for Independence had begun.

The War Begins


CONCLUSION
 When the French and Indian War ended in 1763, it might have seemed reasonable to expect that relations between the English colonists in America and Great Britain itself would have been cemented more firmly than ever. But in fact, the resolution of that conflict altered the imperial relationship forever, in ways that ultimately drove Americans to rebel against English rule and begin a war for independence. To the British, the lesson of the French and Indian War was that the colonies in America needed firmer control from London. The empire was now much bigger, and it needed better administration. The war had produced great debts, and the Americans—among the principal beneficiaries of the war—should help pay them. And so for more than a decade after the end of the fighting, the British tried one strategy after another to tighten control over and extract money from the colonies.

THE EMPIRE IN TRANSITION
• 105 

 To the colonists, this effort to tighten imperial rule seemed both a betrayal of the sacrifices they had made in the war and a challenge to their long-developing assumptions about the rights of English people to rule themselves. Gradually, white Americans came to see in the British policies evidence of a conspiracy to establish tyranny in the New World. And so throughout the 1760s and 1770s, the colonists developed an ideology of resistance and defiance. By the time the first shots were fired in the American Revolution in 1775, Britain and America had come to view each other as two very different societies. Their differences, which soon appeared irreconcilable, propelled them into a war that would change the course of history for both sides.

KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
Albany Plan 85
Benjamin Franklin 94
Boston Massacre 97
Boston Tea Party 102
Coercive Acts 102
 committees of correspondence 102 Creole 85 Currency Act 92 Daughters of Liberty 102

First Continental
Congress 103
Fort Necessity 86
French and Indian War 86
George Grenville 92
George III 91
 impressment 87 Iroquois Confederacy 85 Mutiny Act 92 Patrick Henry 93 Paxton Boys 92

Proclamation of 1763 92
Seven Years’ War 87
Sons of Liberty 96
 sovereignty 99 Stamp Act 93 Sugar Act 92 Tea Act 101 Townshend Duties 97 Virginia Resolves 93 virtual representation 99 William Pitt 87

RECALL AND REFLECT
 1. What Native Americans fought in the French and Indian War, and how did the war’s outcome

 affect them? What about Native Americans who did not participate in the war? 2. How and why did the colonists’ attitude toward Britain change from the time of the Seven

 Years’ War to the beginning of the American Revolution? 3. What were the philosophical underpinnings of the colonists’ revolt against Britain? 4. What did the slogan “No taxation without representation” mean, and why was it a rallying cry

 for the colonists?



THE AMERICAN
REVOLUTION
THE STATES UNITED
THE WAR FOR INDEPENDENCE
WAR AND SOCIETY
THE CREATION OF STATE GOVERNMENTS
THE SEARCH FOR A NATIONAL GOVERNMENT


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. What were the military strategies (both British and American) of each of the three phases of the American Revolution? How successful were these strategies during each phase? 2. How did the American Revolution become an international conflict, not just a colonial war against the British? 3. How did the new national government of the United States reflect the assumptions of republicanism?

TWO STRUGGLES OCCURRED SIMULTANEOUSLY DURING
the seven years of war that began in April 1775. The first was the military conflict with Great Britain. The second was a political conflict within America. The military conflict was, by the standards of later wars, a relatively modest one. By the standards of its own day, however, it was an unusually savage conflict, pitting not only army against army but the civilian population against a powerful external force. The shift of the war from a traditional, conventional struggle to a new kind of conflict—a revolutionary war for liberation—is what made it possible for the United States to defeat the more powerful British. At the same time, Americans were wrestling with the great political questions that the conflict necessarily produced: first, whether to demand independence from Britain; second, how to structure the new nation they had proclaimed; and third, how to deal with questions that the Revolution had raised about slavery, the rights of Indians, the role of women, and the limits of religious tolerance in the new American society. 
106 •


THE STATES UNITED


TIME LINE


 Although some Americans had long expected a military conflict with Britain, the actual beginning of hostilities in 1775 found the colonies generally unprepared for war against the world’s greatest armed power.

Defining American War Aims
 Three weeks after the Battles of Lexington and Concord, when the Second Continental Congress met in Philadelphia, delegates from every colony (except Georgia, which had not yet sent a representative) agreed to support the war. But they disagreed about its purpose. At one extreme was a group led by the Adams cousins (John and Samuel), Richard Henry Lee of Virginia, and others, who already favored independence; at the other extreme was a group led by such moderates as John Dickinson of Pennsylvania, who hoped for a quick reconciliation with Great Britain. Most Americans believed at first that they were fighting not for independence but for a resolution of grievances against the British Empire. During the first year of fighting, however, many colonists began to change their minds. The costs of the war were so high that the original war aims began to seem too modest to justify them. Many colonists were enraged when the British began trying to recruit Indians, African slaves, and German mercenaries (the hated “Hessians”) against them. When the British government blockaded colonial ports and rejected all efforts at conciliation, many colonists concluded that independence was the only remaining option. Thomas Paine’s impassioned pamphlet Common Sense crystallized these feelings in January 1776. Paine, who had emigrated from England less than two years before, wanted to turn the anger of Americans away from particular parliamentary measures and toward what he considered the root of the problem—the English constitution itself.

Second Continental
Congress
 Washington commands American forces Paine’s Common Sense Declaration of Independence Battle of Trenton

French-American
 alliance

Articles of
 Confederation adopted British defeat at Saratoga

Treaty of Paris


Articles of
 Confederation ratified Cornwallis surrenders at Yorktown



 Postwar depression begins

 Shays’s Rebellion Northwest Ordinance

• 107•


DEBATING THE PAST


The American Revolution
 The long-standing debate over the origins of the American Revolution has tended to reflect two broad schools of interpretation. One sees the Revolution largely as a political and intellectual event; the other, as a social and economic phenomenon. The Revolutionary generation itself portrayed the conflict as a struggle over ideals, and this interpretation prevailed through most of the nineteenth century. But in the early twentieth century, historians influenced by the reform currents of the progressive era began to identify social and economic forces that they believed had contributed to the rebellion. Carl Becker, for example, wrote in a 1909 study of New York that two questions had shaped the Revolution: “The first was the question of home rule; the second was the question . . . of who should rule at home.” The colonists were not only fighting the British, but also were engaged in a kind of civil war, a contest between radicals and conservatives. Other historians elaborated on Becker’s thesis. J. Franklin Jameson, writing in 1926, argued, “Many economic desires, many social aspirations, were set free by the political struggle, many aspects of society profoundly altered by the forces thus let loose.” Arthur M. Schlesinger maintained in a 1917 book that colonial merchants, motivated by their own interest in escaping the restrictive policies of British mercantilism, aroused American resistance in the 1760s and 1770s. Beginning in the 1950s, a new generation of scholars began to reemphasize the role of ideology and de-emphasize the role of economic interests. Robert E. Brown (in 1955) and Edmund S. Morgan (in 1956) 108 •

 both argued that most eighteenth-century Americans shared common political principles and that the social and economic conflicts other historians had identified were not severe. The rhetoric of the Revolution, they suggested, was not propaganda but a real reflection of the ideas of the colonists. Bernard Bailyn, in The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution (1967), demonstrated the complex roots of the ideas behind the Revolution and argued that this carefully constructed political stance was not a disguise for economic interests but a genuine ideology, rooted in deeply held convictions about rights and power. The Revolution, he exclaimed, “was above all an ideological, constitutional, political struggle and not primarily a controversy between social groups undertaken to force changes in the organization of the society or the economy.” By the late 1960s, a new generation of historians—many influenced by the New ­ Left—were reviving economic interpretations of the Revolution by exploring the social and economic tensions that they claimed shaped the Revolutionary struggle. Historians cited economic distress and the actions of mobs in colonial cities, the economic pressures on colonial merchants, and other changes in the character of American culture and society as critical prerequisites for the growth of the Revolutionary movement. Gary Nash, attempting to reconcile the emphasis on economic interests with the role of ideology, argued that the two things were not incompatible. “Everyone has economic interests,” he claimed, “and everyone . . . has an ideology.” Exploring the relationship between the two, he a­ rgued, is critical to historians’

 This contemporary drawing depicts the formal surrender of British troops at Yorktown on October 19, 1781. Columns of American troops and a large French fleet flank the surrender ceremony, suggesting part of the reason for the British defeat. General Cornwallis, the commander of British forces in Virginia, did not himself attend the surrender. He sent a deputy in his place. (© MPI/Hulton Archive/Getty Images) THE BRITISH SURRENDER

 ability to understand either. Also, as Linda Kerber and others have argued, the newer social interpretations have raised increasing interest in the experience of workers, slaves, women, Native Americans, and other groups previously considered marginal to public life as part of the explanation of the Revolutionary struggle. Finally, Gordon Wood, in The Radicalism of the American Revolution (1992), revived an idea once popular and recently unfashionable: that the Revolution was a genuinely radical event that led to the breakdown of such long-standing characteristics of ­society

 as deference, patriarchy, and traditional gender relations. Class conflict may not have caused the Revolution, he argued, but the Revolution had a profound, even radical, effect on society nevertheless.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. In what way was the American

 Revolution an ideological struggle? 2. In what way was the American

 Revolution a social and economic ­conflict? • 109

