136 • CHAPTER 6


Compromise
 The delegates bickered for weeks. By the end of June, with both temperature and tempers rising, the convention seemed in danger of collapsing. Finally, on July 2, the convention created a “grand committee,” comprised of one delegate from each state, which produced The “Great Compromise” a proposal that became the basis of the “Great Compromise.” It called for a two-house legislature. In the lower house, the states would be represented on the basis of population; each slave would be counted as three-fifths of a free person in determining the basis for both representation and direct taxation. In the upper house, the states would be represented equally with two members apiece. On July 16, 1787, the convention voted to accept the compromise. In the next few weeks, the convention agreed to another important compromise. To placate southern delegates, who feared the new government would interfere with slavery, the convention agreed to bar the new government from stopping the slave trade for twenty years. Some significant issues remained unaddressed. The Constitution provided no definition of citizenship. Nor did it resolve the status of Native American tribes. Most important to Unresolved Issues many Americans was the absence of a list of individual rights, which would restrain the powers of the national government. Madison opposed the idea, arguing that specifying rights that were reserved to the people would, in effect, limit those rights. Others, however, feared that without such protections the national government might abuse its new authority.

The Constitution of 1787
 Many people contributed to the creation of the American Constitution, but the most ­important person in the process was James Madison. Madison had devised the Virginia Plan, and he did most of the drafting of the Constitution itself. Madison’s most important achievement, however, was in helping resolve two important philosophical questions: the The Question of Sovereignty question of sovereignty and the question of limiting power. (For historians’ evolving views on the Constitution’s purpose, see “Debating the Past: The Meaning of the Constitution.”) How could a national government exercise sovereignty concurrently with state governments? Where did ultimate sovereignty lie? The answer, Madison and his contemporaries decided, was that all power, at all levels of government, flowed ultimately from the people. Thus neither the federal government nor the state governments were truly sovereign. All of them derived their authority from below. The resolution of the problem of sovereignty made possible one of the distinctive features of the Constitution—its federalism, or division of powers between the national and state governments. The Constitution and the government it created were to be the “supreme law” of the land. At the same time, however, the Constitution left important powers in the hands of the states. In addition to solving the question of sovereignty, the Constitution produced a distinctive solution to the problem of concentrated authority. Drawing from the ideas of the French philosopher Baron de Montesquieu, most Americans had long believed that the best way to avoid tyranny was to keep government close to the people. A large nation would breed ­corruption and despotism because distant rulers could not be controlled by the people. Madison, however, helped break the grip of these assumptions by arguing that a large republic would be less likely to produce tyranny because no single group would ever be able to dominate it. The idea of many centers of power “checking one another” and preventing any single, despotic authority from emerging also helped shape the

THE CONSTITUTION AND THE NEW REPUBLIC
• 137 

 internal structure of the federal government. The Constitution’s most distinctive feature was its separation of powers within the government, managed by a system of checks and balances among the legislative, executive, and judicial branches. The forces within the government would ­constantly compete with one another. Congress would have two chambers, each checking the other, since both would have to agree before any law could be passed. The president would have the power to veto acts of Congress. The federal courts would be protected from both the executive and the legislature, because judges would serve for life. The “federal” structure of the government was designed to protect the United States from the kind of despotism that Americans believed had emerged in England. But it was also designed to protect the nation from another kind of despotism: the tyranny of the people. Shays’s Rebellion, most of the founders believed, had been only one example of what could happen if a nation did not defend itself against the unchecked exercise of popular will. Thus in the new government, only the members Checks on Exercise of Popular Will of the House of Representatives would be elected directly by the people. Senators would be chosen by state legislators. The president would be chosen by an electoral college. Federal judges would be appointed by the president and confirmed by the Senate. On September 17, 1787, thirty-nine delegates signed the Constitution. The Constitution of 1787 was a document that established a democratic republic for white people, mostly white men. Native Americans and African Americans, the two largest population groups sharing the lands of the United States with Anglo-Americans, enjoyed virtually none of the rights and privileges offered to the white population. Limited Democracy Native Americans had at least the semblance of a legal status within the nation, through treaties that assured them lands that would be theirs forever. But most of these treaties did not survive for long, and native groups found themselves driven farther and farther west without very much of the protection that the government had promised them. Among the white leaders of the United States, there were eminent figures who believed Native Americans could in fact join the republic as citizens. Thomas Jefferson was among them, believing that they could be taught the ways of “civilization.” Jefferson sought to teach the Native Americans to live as white Americans did. Efforts to teach them Anglo farming methods were based on sedentary farms that relied on men doing the farming and women caring for the home. Native Americans had no interest in such ways and preferred to retain their own traditional cultures. Their repudiation of white civilization contributed to the erosion of support among white Americans. They were not granted citizenship of the United States until the 1920s. Far more removed from the guarantees of the Constitution were enslaved African Americans, who were given virtually none of the rights and protections that the new government provided to white people. They were not, one southern official noted, ­“constituent members of our society.” The French-Canadian writer Hector St. John de Crèvecoeur, who after the Revolution settled in the United States, wrote a famous book in 1782 titled Letters from an American Farmer. In it, he posed what became a famous question: What then is the American, this new man? Crèvecoeur answered his own ­question by noting that “individuals of all nations” would become “melted” into a ­common citizenry. But he saw no room for African Americans in the new community. Indeed, among the first laws passed by the new United States under the Constitution was the Naturalization Act of 1790, which helped legalize the stream of immigrants coming into the country and allowed them to become citizens. But it defined citizenry as a status available only to white people. Even free black people were barred from inclusion.

DEBATING THE PAST


The Meaning of the Constitution
The Constitution of the United States
 ­inspired debate from the moment it was drafted. Some argue that the Constitution is a flexible document intended to evolve in response to society’s evolution. Others ­ counter that it has a fixed meaning, rooted in the “original intent” of the framers, and that to move beyond that is to deny its value. Historians, too, disagree about why the Constitution was written and what it meant. To some scholars, the creation of the federal system was an effort to preserve the ideals of the Revolution and to create a strong ­national government capable of exercising real authority. To others, the Constitution was an effort to protect the economic interests of existing elites, even at the cost of ­betraying the ­principles of the Revolution. And to still ­ others, the Constitution was ­designed to ­protect individual freedom and to limit the power of the federal government. The first influential exponent of the heroic view of the Constitution as the culmination of the Revolution was John Fiske, whose book The Critical Period of American History (1888) painted a grim picture of political life under the Articles of Confederation. Many problems, ­including economic difficulties, the weakness and ineptitude of the national government, threats from abroad, interstate jealousies, and widespread lawlessness, beset the new nation. Fiske argued that only the timely adoption of the Constitution saved the young republic from disaster. In An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution of the United States (1913), Charles A. Beard presented a powerful challenge to Fiske’s view. According to Beard, the 1780s had been a “critical period” primarily for conservative business interests who feared 138 •

 that the decentralized political structure of the republic imperiled their financial position. Such men, he claimed, wanted a government able to promote industry and trade, protect private property, and perhaps, most of all, make good the public debt—much of which was owed to them. The Constitution was, Beard claimed, “an economic document drawn with superb skill by men whose property interests were immediately at stake” and who won its ratification over the opposition of a majority of the people. A series of powerful challenges to Beard’s thesis emerged in the 1950s. The Constitution, many scholars now began to ­argue, was not an effort to preserve property but an enlightened effort to ensure stability and ­order. Robert E. Brown, for example, argued in 1956 that “absolutely no correlation” could be shown between the wealth of the delegates to the Constitutional Convention and their position on the Constitution. Examining ­ the debate between the Federalists and the Antifederalists, Forrest McDonald, in We the People (1958), also concluded that there was no consistent relationship between wealth and property and support for the Constitution. Instead, opinion on the new system was far more likely to reflect local and regional interests. These challenges greatly weakened Beard’s argument; few historians any longer accept his thesis without reservation. In the 1960s, scholars began again to ­revive an economic interpretation of the Constitution—but one that differed from Beard’s and nevertheless emphasized social and economic factors as motives for supporting the federal system. Jackson Turner Main argued in The Anti-federalists (1961) that supporters of the Constitution were

(National Archives and Records Administration)


 “cosmopolitan commercialists,” eager to advance the economic development of the nation; the Antifederalists, by contrast, were “agrarian localists,” fearful of centralization. Gordon Wood, in The Creation of the American Republic (1969), suggested that the debate over the state constitutions in the 1770s and 1780s reflected profound social divisions and that those same divisions helped shape the argument over the federal Constitution. The Federalists, Wood suggested, were largely traditional aristocrats who had become deeply concerned by the instability of life under the Articles of Confederation and were particularly alarmed by the decline in popular deference toward social elites. The creation of the Constitution was part of a larger search to create a legitimate political leadership based on the existing social hierarchy; it reflected the efforts of elites to contain what they considered the excesses of democracy. More recently, historians have continued to examine the question of “intent.” Did the framers intend a strong, centralized political system; or did they intend to create a decentralized system with a heavy emphasis on individual rights? The answer, according to Jack Rakove in Original Meanings (1996), and

 Revolutionaries (2010), is both—and many other things as well. The Constitution, he ­argues, was the result of a long and vigorous debate through which the views of many ­different groups found their way into the ­document. James Madison, generally known as the father of the Constitution, was a strong nationalist, as was Alexander Hamilton. They believed that only a powerful central government could preserve stability in a large nation, and they saw the Constitution as a way to protect order and property and defend the nation against the dangers of too much liberty. But if Madison and Hamilton feared too much liberty, they also feared too little. And that made them receptive to the demands of the Antifederalists for protections of individual rights, which culminated in the Bill of Rights. The framers differed as well in their views of the proper relationship between the federal government and the state governments. Madison favored unquestioned federal supremacy, while many others, who wanted to preserve the rights of the states, saw in the federal system—and in its division of sovereignty among different levels and branches of government—a guarantee against too much national power. The Constitution is not, Rakove argues, “infinitely malleable.” But neither does it have a fixed meaning that can be an inflexible guide to how we interpret it today.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. Is the Constitution a conservative, liberal,

 or radical document? Did the framers consider the Constitution something ­“finished” (with the exception of constitutional amendments), or did they consider it a document that would evolve in ­response to changes in society over time? 2. Which parts of the Constitution suggest that the framers’ intent was to create a strong, centralized political system? Which parts suggest that the framers’ ­intent was to create a decentralized system with heavy emphasis on individual rights? • 139

140 • CHAPTER 6


 Jefferson, who had briefly tried without result to give Indians a legal status within the new nation, had no such aspirations for African Americans. He was an uneasy defender of slavery, worrying about excluding “a whole race of men” from the natural rights that Jefferson himself had done much to promote. But he could never accept the idea that black men and women could attain the level of knowledge and intelligence of white people. Jefferson’s long romantic relationship with a black woman, Sally Hemmings, did nothing to change his mind. Hemmings was a light-skinned woman who was a slave on Jefferson’s plantation in Virginia. He lived with her after the death of his wife and fathered several of The Hemmings Family her children. But his intimate relationship with the Hemmings family did not ultimately change his position on slavery. Unlike George Washington, who freed his slaves after his death, Jefferson (deeply in debt) required his heirs to sell his slaves after he died (after liberating the Hemmings family). Not until the end of the Civil War were black men and women eligible to live as citizens in the United States, and even then with only partial rights until a century later. For almost a hundred years, the United States Constitution was a document that protected white people only.

ADOPTION AND ADAPTATION
 The delegates at Philadelphia had greatly exceeded their instructions from Congress and the states. Instead of making simple revisions in the Articles of Confederation, they had produced a plan for a completely different form of government. They feared that the Constitution would not be ratified under the rules of the Articles of Confederation, which required unanimous approval by the state legislatures. So the convention changed the rules, proposing that the new government would come into being when nine of the thirteen states ratified the Constitution and recommending that state conventions, not state legislatures, be called to ratify it.

Federalists and Antifederalists
 The Congress in New York accepted the convention’s work and submitted it to the states for approval. All the state legislatures except Rhode Island elected delegates to ratifying conventions, most of which began meeting in early 1788. Even before the ratifying conventions convened, however, a great national debate on the new Constitution had begun. Supporters of the Constitution had a number of advantages. Better organized than their opponents, they seized an appealing label for themselves: Federalists—a term that opponents of centralization had once used to describe themselves—thus implying that they were less committed to a “nationalist” government than in fact they were. In addition, the Federalists had the support of not only the two most eminent men in America, Franklin and Washington, but also the ablest political philosophers of their time: Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, and John Jay. Under the joint pseudonym Publius, these three men wrote a series of essays, widely published in newspapers throughout the nation, explaining the meaning and virtues of the Constitution. The essays were later gathered together and The Federalist Papers ­published as a book known today as The Federalist Papers. The Federalists called their critics “Antifederalists,” suggesting that their rivals had The Antifederalists nothing to offer except opposition. But the Antifederalists, too, led by such distinguished Revolutionary leaders as Patrick Henry and Samuel Adams, had serious and intelligent arguments. They were, they believed, the defenders of the true principles

THE CONSTITUTION AND THE NEW REPUBLIC
• 141 

 of the Revolution. They believed that the Constitution would increase taxes, weaken the states, wield dictatorial powers, favor the “well-born” over the common people, and ­abolish individual liberty. But their biggest complaint was that the Constitution lacked a bill of rights. Only by enumerating the natural rights of the people, they argued, could there be any certainty that those rights would be protected. Despite the efforts of the Antifederalists, ratification proceeded quickly during the winter of 1787–1788. The Delaware convention, the first to act, ratified the Constitution unanimously, as did the New Jersey and Georgia conventions. And in June 1788, Ratification of the Constitution New Hampshire, the critical ninth state, ratified the document. It was now theoretically p­ ossible for the Constitution to go into effect. But a new government could not hope to succeed without Virginia and New York, the largest states, whose conventions remained closely divided. By the end of June, first Virginia and then New York consented to the Constitution by narrow margins—on the assumption that a bill of rights would be added in the form of amendments to the Constitution. North Carolina’s convention adjourned without taking action, waiting to see what happened to the amendments. Rhode Island, controlled by staunch opponents of centralized government, did not even consider ratification.

Completing the Structure
 The first elections under the Constitution were held in the early months of 1789. There was never any doubt about who would be the first president. George Washington had presided at the Constitutional Convention, and many who had favored ratification did so only because they expected him to preside over the new government as well. Washington received the votes of all the presidential electors. (  John Adams, a leading Federalist, became vice president.) After a journey from his estate at Mount Vernon, Virginia, marked by elaborate celebrations along the way, Washington was inaugurated in New York on April 30, 1789.

 Washington was in his first term as president in 1790 when an anonymous folk artist painted this view of his home at Mount Vernon, Virginia. Washington appears in uniform, along with members of his family, on the lawn. After he retired from office in 1797, Washington returned happily to his plantation and spent the two years before his death in 1799 “amusing myself in agricultural and rural pursuits.” He also played host to an endless stream of visitors from throughout the country and Europe. (© Courtesy National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.) GEORGE WASHINGTON AT MOUNT VERNON

142 • CHAPTER 6


 The first Congress served in many ways as a continuation of the Constitutional Convention. Its most important task was drafting a bill of rights. By early 1789, even Madison had come to agree that some sort of bill of rights would be essential to legitimize the new government. On September 25, 1789, Congress approved twelve amendments, ten of which were ratified by the states by the end of 1791. These first ten amendments to the The Bill of Rights Constitution comprise what we know as the Bill of Rights. Nine of them placed limitations on the new government by forbidding it to infringe on certain fundamental rights: freedom of religion, speech, and the press; immunity from arbitrary arrest; trial by jury; and others. The Bill of Rights had very specific terms; provisions for the judiciary branch were more vague. The Constitution said only: “The judicial power of the United States shall be vested in one Supreme Court, and in such inferior courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish.” It was left to Congress to determine the number of Supreme Court judges to be appointed and the kinds of lower courts to be organized. In the Judiciary Act of 1789, Congress provided for a Supreme Court of six members and a system of lower district courts and courts of appeal. It also gave the Supreme Court the power to make the final decision in cases involving the constitutionality of state laws. The Constitution also said little about the organization of the executive branch. It referred indirectly to executive departments but did not specify which ones or how many there should be. The first Congress created three such ­departments—state, treasury, and war—and also established the offices of the attorney general and postmaster general. To Organizing the Executive Branch the office of secretary of the treasury, Washington appointed Alexander Hamilton of New York. For secretary of war, he chose a Massachusetts Federalist, General Henry Knox. He named Edmund Randolph of Virginia as attorney general and chose another Virginian, Thomas Jefferson, for secretary of state.

FEDERALISTS AND REPUBLICANS
 The framers of the Constitution had dealt with many controversies by papering them over with a series of vague compromises; as a result, the disagreements survived to plague the new government. At the heart of the controversies of the 1790s was the same basic difference in philosophy that had fueled the debate over the Constitution. On one side stood a powerful group who envisioned America as a genuine nation-state, with centralized authority and a complex ­commercial economy. On the other side stood another group whose members envisioned a more modest national government. Rather than aspire to be a highly commercial or urban nation, it should remain predominantly rural and agrarian. The centralizers became known as the Federalists and gravitated to the leadership of Alexander Hamilton. Their opponents acquired the name Republicans and admired the views of Thomas Jefferson as well as James Madison, who grew skeptical of Federalist rule.

Hamilton and the Federalists
 For twelve years, the Federalists retained firm control of the new government. That was in part because George Washington had always envisioned a strong national government. But the president, Washington believed, should stand above political controversies, and so he avoided personal involvement in the deliberations of Congress. As a result, the

THE CONSTITUTION AND THE NEW REPUBLIC
• 143 

 dominant figure in his administration became Alexander Hamilton. Of all the national leaders of his time, Hamilton was one of the most aristocratic in his political philosophy; he believed that a stable and effective government required an elite ruling class. Thus the new government needed the support of the wealthy and powerful; and to get that, it needed to give elites a stake in its success. Hamilton proposed, Hamilton’s “Funded” Debt Proposal therefore, that the existing public debt be “funded”: that the various certificates of indebtedness that the old Congress had issued during and after the Revolution—many of them now in the possession of wealthy speculators—be called in and exchanged for interestbearing bonds. He also recommended that the states’ Revolutionary debts be “assumed” (taken over) to cause state bondholders also to look to the central government for eventual payment. Hamilton wanted to create a permanent national debt, with new bonds being issued as old ones were paid off. He hoped to motivate the wealthy classes, who were the most likely to lend money to the government, to support perpetually the survival of that centralized state. Hamilton also wanted to create a national bank. It would provide loans and ­currency to businesses, give the government a safe place for the deposit of federal funds, facilitate the collection of taxes and the disbursement of the government’s expenditures, and provide a stable center to the nation’s small and feeble banking system. The bank would be chartered by the federal government, but much of its capital would come from private investors. The funding and assumption of debts would require new sources of revenue. Hamilton recommended two kinds of taxes to complement the receipts anticipated from the sales of public land. One was an excise tax on alcoholic beverages, a tax that would be most ­burdensome to the whiskey distillers of the backcountry, small farmers who converted part of their corn and rye crops into whiskey. The other was a tariff on imports, which Hamilton saw not only as a way to raise money but as a way to protect domestic industries from foreign competition. In his famous “Report on Manufactures” of “Report on Manufactures” 1791, he outlined a plan for stimulating the growth of industry and spoke glowingly of the advantages to society of a healthy manufacturing sector. The Federalists, in short, offered more than a vision of a stable new government. They offered a vision of the sort of nation America should become—a nation with a wealthy, enlightened ruling class; a vigorous, independent commercial economy; and a thriving manufacturing sector.

Enacting the Federalist Program
 Few members of Congress objected to Hamilton’s plan for funding the national debt, but many did oppose his proposal to exchange new bonds for old certificates of indebtedness on a dollar-for-dollar basis. Many of the original holders had been forced to sell during the hard times of the 1780s to speculators, who had bought them at a fraction of their face value. James Madison, now a representative from Virginia, argued for a plan by which the new bonds would be divided between the original purchasers and the speculators. But Hamilton’s allies insisted that the honor of the government required a literal fulfillment of its earlier promises to pay whoever held the bonds. Congress finally passed the funding bill Hamilton wanted. Hamilton’s proposal that the federal government assume the state debts encountered greater difficulty. Its opponents argued that if the federal government took over the state debts, the states with small debts would have to pay taxes to service the states with large ones.

144 • CHAPTER 6


 Massachusetts, for example, owed much more money than did Virginia. Only by striking a bargain with the Virginians were Hamilton and his supporters able to win ­passage of the assumption bill. The deal involved the location of the national capital, which the Virginians wanted near them in the South. Hamilton and Jefferson met and agreed to exchange northern Bargaining and the National Capital support for placing the capital in the South for Virginia’s votes for the assumption bill. The bargain called for the construction of a new capital city on the banks of the Potomac River, which divided Maryland and Virginia, on land to be selected by George Washington. Hamilton’s bank bill produced the most heated debates. Madison, Jefferson, Randolph, and others argued that because the Constitution made no provision for a national bank, Congress had no authority to create one. But Congress agreed to Hamilton’s bill despite these objections, and Washington signed it. The Bank of the United States began ­operations in 1791. Hamilton also had his way with the excise tax, although protests from farmers later forced revisions to reduce the burden on the smaller distillers. He failed to win passage of a tariff as highly protective as he had hoped for, but the tariff law of 1792 did raise the rates somewhat. Once enacted, Hamilton’s program won the support of manufacturers, creditors, and other influential segments of the population. But others found it less appealing. Small farmers complained that they were being taxed excessively. They and others began to argue that the Federalist program served the interests of a small number of wealthy elites rather than the people at large. From these sentiments, an organized political opposition arose.

The Republican Opposition
 The Constitution made no reference to political parties. Most of the framers believed that organized parties were dangerous “factions” to be avoided. Disagreement was inevitable on particular issues, but they believed that such disagreements need not and should not lead to the formation of permanent factions. Yet not many years had passed after the ratification of the Constitution before Madison and others became convinced that Hamilton and his followers had become dangerous and self-interested. The Federalists had used the powers of their offices to reward their supporters and win additional allies. They were doing many of the same things, their opponents believed, that the corrupt British governments of the early ­eighteenth century had done. Because the Federalists appeared to their critics to be creating such a menacing and tyrannical structure of power, there was no alternative but to organize a vigorous opposition. The result was the emergence of an alternative political organization, whose members called themselves “Republicans.” (These first Republicans are not institutionally related to the modern Republican Party, which was created in the 1850s.) By the late 1790s, the Formation of the First Party System Republicans were going to even greater lengths than the Federalists to create vehicles of partisan influence. In every state they formed committees, societies, and caucuses; Republican groups banded together to influence state and local elections. Neither side was willing to admit that it was acting as a party, nor would either concede the right of the other to exist. This institutionalized factionalism is known to historians as the “first party system.” From the beginning, the preeminent figures among the Republicans were Thomas Jefferson and James Madison. The most prominent spokesman for the cause, Jefferson

THE CONSTITUTION AND THE NEW REPUBLIC
• 145 

THE JEFFERSONIAN IDYLL
American artists in the early nineteenth century were drawn to tranquil rural scenes, symbolic of the Jeffersonian vision of a nation of small, independent farmers. By 1822, when Francis Alexander painted this depiction of “Ralph Wheelock’s Farm,” the simple agrarian republic was already being transformed by rapid economic growth. (© Courtesy National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.) 
 promoted a vision of an agrarian republic, in which most citizens would farm their own land. Jefferson did not scorn commercial or industrial activity. But he believed that the nation should be wary of too much urbanization and industrialization. Although both parties had supporters across the country and among all classes, there were regional and economic differences. The Federalists Regional and Economic Differences were most numerous in the commercial centers of the Northeast and in such southern seaports as Charleston; the Republicans were stronger in the rural areas of the South and the West. The difference in their philosophies was visible in, among other things, their reactions to the progress of the French Revolution. As that revolution grew increasingly radical in the 1790s, the Federalists expressed horror. But the Republicans applauded the democratic, antiaristocratic spirit they believed the French Revolution embodied. When the time came for the nation’s second presidential election, in 1792, both Jefferson and Hamilton urged Washington to run for a second term. The president reluctantly agreed. But while Washington had the respect of both factions, he was, in reality, more in sympathy with the Federalists than with the Republicans.

ESTABLISHING NATIONAL SOVEREIGNTY
 The Federalists consolidated their position by acting effectively in managing the western territories and diplomacy.

Securing the West
 Despite the Northwest Ordinance, the old Congress had largely failed to tie the outlying western areas of the country firmly to the national government. Farmers in western Massachusetts had rebelled; settlers in Vermont, Kentucky, and Tennessee had flirted with seceding from the Union. And at first, the new government under the Constitution faced similar problems.

CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
WASHINGTON’S FAREWELL ADDRESS, AMERICAN
DAILY ADVERTISER, SEPTEMBER 19, 1796
 In this open letter to the American people, President Washington defended the young Constitution and warned against disunity among the nation’s various states and politi­ cal factions. Here he cautions citizens about another threat to the republic—entangling engagements abroad. Observe good faith and justice toward all nations. Cultivate peace and harmony with all. Religion and morality enjoin this conduct. And can it be that good policy does not equally enjoin it? It will be worthy of a free, enlightened, and, at no distant ­period, a great nation to give to mankind the ­magnanimous and too novel example of a ­people always guided by an exalted justice and benevolence. . . . In the execution of such a plan nothing is more essential than that permanent, inveterate antipathies against particular nations and passionate attachments for others should be excluded, and that, in place of them just and amicable feelings toward all should be cultivated. The nation which ­indulges toward another an habitual hatred or an habitual fondness is in some degree a slave. It is a slave to its animosity or to its affection either of which is sufficient to lead it astray from its duty and its interest. The nation prompted by ill will and resentment sometimes impels to war the government, contrary to the best calculations of policy. The government sometimes participates in the national propensity, and adopts through passion what reason would reject. . . . So, likewise, a passionate attachment of one nation for another produces a variety of evils. Sympathy for the favorite nation, facilitating the illusion of an imaginary common interest in cases where no real ­common interest exists, and infusing into one the ­enmities of the other, betrays the former 146 •

 into a participation in the quarrels and wars of the latter without adequate inducement or justification. . . . As avenues to foreign influence in innumerable ways, such attachments are particularly alarming to the truly enlightened and independent patriot. How many opportunities do they afford to tamper with domestic factions to practice the arts of seduction, to mislead public opinion, to influence or awe the public councils! Such an attachment of a small or weak toward a great and powerful nation dooms the former to be the satellite of the latter. Against the insidious wiles of foreign ­influence (I conjure you to believe me, ­fellow citizens) the jealousy of a free people ought to be constantly awake, since history and experience prove that foreign influence is one of the most baneful foes of republican government. . . . The great rule of conduct for us in r­ egard to foreign nations is, in extending our ­commercial relation to have with them as little political connection as possible. So far as we have already formed engagements, let them be fulfilled with perfect good faith. Here let us stop. Europe has a set of primary interests which to us have no, or a very remote, ­relation. Hence she must be engaged in ­frequent controversies, the causes of which are essentially foreign to our concerns. Hence, therefore, it must be unwise in us to implicate ourselves by artificial ties in the ordinary vicissitudes of her politics, or the ordinary combinations and collisions of her friendships or enmities. Our detached and distant situation ­invites and enables us to pursue a different course. If we remain one people, under an efficient government, the period is not far off when we may defy material injury from

 external annoyance; when we may take such an attitude as will cause the neutrality we may at any time resolve upon to be ­scrupulously respected; when belligerent ­nations, under the impossibility of making acquisitions upon us, will not lightly hazard giving us provocation; when we may choose peace or war, as our interest, guided by ­justice, shall counsel. Why forego the advantages of so peculiar a situation? Why quit our own to stand upon foreign ground? Why, by interweaving our destiny with that of any part of Europe, entangle our peace and prosperity in the toils of European ambition, rivalship, interest, humor, or caprice? It is our true policy to steer clear of ­permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign world, so far, I mean, as we are now at liberty to do it. For let me not be understood as capable of patronizing infidelity to existing engagements. I hold the maxim of less applicable to public than to private affairs that honesty is always the best ­ ­policy. I repeat therefore, let those engagements be observed in their genuine sense. But in my opinion it is unnecessary and would be unwise to extend them. Taking care always to keep ourselves by suitable establishments on a respectable defensive posture, we may safely trust to temporary alliances for extraordinary emergencies.

 Harmony, liberal intercourse with all nations, are recommended by policy, humanity, and interest. But even our commercial policy should hold an equal and impartial hand, neither seeking nor granting exclusive favors or preferences; . . . constantly keeping in view that it is folly in one n ­ ation to look for disinterested favors from ­another; that it must pay with a portion of its independence for whatever it may ­accept under that character; that by such acceptance it may place itself in the c ondition of having given equivalents ­ for nominal favors, and yet of being reproached with ingratitude for not ­giving more. There can be no greater error than to expect or calculate upon real favors from nation to nation. It is an illusion which experience must cure, which a just pride ought to discard. UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE 1. What advice did George Washington

 ­offer on foreign policy? 2. Did Washington advocate the complete

 isolation of the United States from Europe? Explain. 3. How did Washington characterize Europe? What circumstances of the 1790s may have inspired this ­assessment?

 Source: www.senate.gov/artandhistory/history/minute/Washingtons_Farewell_Address.htm.

 In 1794, farmers in western Pennsylvania raised a major challenge to federal authority when they refused to pay the new whiskey excise tax and began terrorizing tax collectors in the region. But the federal government did not leave settlement of the so-called Whiskey Rebellion to the authorities of Pennsylvania. At Hamilton’s urging, Whiskey Rebellion Washington called out the militias of three states and assembled an army of nearly 15,000—and he personally led the troops into Pennsylvania. At the approach of the ­militiamen, the rebellion quickly collapsed. The federal government won the allegiance of the whiskey rebels through intimidation. It secured the loyalties of other western people by accepting new states as members of the Union. The last two of the original thirteen colonies joined the Union once the Bill of Rights had been appended to the Constitution—North Carolina in 1789 and Rhode • 147

148 • CHAPTER 6


 Island in 1790. Vermont became the fourteenth state in 1791, after New York and New Hampshire agreed to give up their rights to it. Next came Kentucky, in 1792, when Virginia relinquished its claim to that region. After North Carolina ceded its western lands to the Union, Tennessee became a state in 1796. The new government faced a greater challenge in more distant areas of the Northwest and the Southwest. The ordinances of 1784–1787, establishing the terms of white settlement in the West, had produced a series of border conflicts with native tribes. The new government inherited these tensions, which continued with few interruptions for nearly a decade. Such clashes revealed another issue the Constitution had done little to resolve: the place of Native Americans within the new federal structure. The Constitution gave Congress power to “regulate Commerce . . . with the Indian tribes.” And it bound the new government to respect treaties negotiated by the Confederation, most of which had been with the tribes. But none of this did very much to clarify the precise legal standing of Indians within the United States. The tribes received no direct representation in the Native Americans’ Ambiguous Status new government. Above all, the Constitution did not address the major issue of land. Native Americans lived within the boundaries of the United States, yet they claimed (and the white government at times agreed) that they had some measure of sovereignty over their own land. But neither the Constitution nor common law offered any clear guide to the rights of a “nation within a nation” or to the precise nature of tribal sovereignty.

Maintaining Neutrality
 A crisis in Anglo-American relations emerged in 1793, when the revolutionary French government went to war with Great Britain. Both the president and Congress took steps to establish American neutrality in the conflict, but that neutrality was severely tested. Early in 1794, the Royal Navy began seizing hundreds of American ships engaged in trade in the French West Indies. Hamilton was deeply concerned. War would mean an end to imports from England, and most of the revenue for maintaining his financial ­system came from duties on those imports. Hamilton and the Federalists did not trust the State Department, now in the hands of the ardently pro-French Edmund Randolph, to find a solution to the crisis. So they persuaded Washington to name a special commissioner—the chief justice of the Supreme Court, John Jay—to go to England and negotiate a solution. Jay was instructed to secure compensation for the recent British assaults on American shipping, to demand withdrawal of British forces from their posts on the frontier of the United States, and to negotiate a commercial treaty with Britain. The long and complex treaty Jay negotiated in 1794 failed to achieve all these goals. But it settled the conflict with Britain, avoiding a likely war. It provided for undisputed American sovereignty over the entire Northwest and produced a reasonably satisfactory Jay’s Treaty commercial relationship. Nevertheless, when the terms became known in America, criticism was intense. Opponents of the treaty went to great lengths to defeat it, but in the end the Senate ratified what was by then known as Jay’s Treaty. Jay’s Treaty paved the way for a settlement of important American disputes with Spain. Pinckney’s Treaty Under Pinckney’s Treaty (negotiated by Thomas Pinckney and signed in 1795), Spain recognized the right of Americans to navigate the Mississippi to its mouth and to deposit goods at New Orleans for reloading on oceangoing ships; agreed to fix the northern boundary of Florida along the 31st parallel; and commanded its authorities to

THE CONSTITUTION AND THE NEW REPUBLIC
• 149 

 prevent Native Americans in Florida from launching raids north across that border. (For President Washington’s views on such matters of foreign policy, see “Consider the Source: Washington’s Farewell Address.”)

THE DOWNFALL OF THE FEDERALISTS
 Since almost everyone in the 1790s agreed that there was no place in a stable republic for organized parties, the emergence of the Republicans as a powerful and apparently permanent opposition seemed to the Federalists a grave threat to national stability. And so when international perils confronted the government in the 1790s, Hamilton and his followers moved forcefully against what they considered illegitimate dissent.

The Election of 1796
 George Washington refused to run for a third term as president in 1796. Jefferson was the obvious presidential candidate of the Republicans that year, but the Federalists faced a more difficult choice. Hamilton had created too many enemies to be a credible candidate. Vice President John Adams, who was not directly associated with any of the controversial Federalist achievements, received the party’s nomination for president at a caucus of the Federalists in Congress. The Federalists were still clearly the dominant party. But without Washington to mediate, they fell victim to fierce factional rivalries. Adams defeated Jefferson by John Adams Elected only three electoral votes and assumed the presidency as head of a divided party facing a powerful opposition. Jefferson became vice president by finishing second. (Not until the adoption of the Twelfth Amendment in 1804 did electors vote separately for president and vice president.)

 The Quasi War with France American relations with Great Britain and Spain improved as a result of Jay’s and Pinckney’s treaties. But the nation’s relations with revolutionary France quickly deteriorated. French vessels captured American ships on the high seas. The French government refused to receive Charles Cotesworth Pinckney when he arrived in Paris as the new American minister. In an effort to stabilize relations, Adams appointed a bipartisan commission to negotiate with France. When the Americans arrived in Paris in 1797, three agents of the French foreign minister, Prince Talleyrand, demanded a loan for France and a bribe for French officials before any negotiations could begin. Pinckney, a member of the commission, responded, “No! No! Not a sixpence!” When Adams heard of the incident, he sent a message to Congress urging preparations for war. Before giving the commissioners’ report to Congress, he deleted the names of the three French agents and designated them only as Messrs. X, Y, and Z. When the report was published, the “XYZ Affair,” as it quickly became known, provoked The “XYZ Affair” widespread popular outrage at France’s actions and strong popular support for the Federalists’ response. For nearly two years, 1798 and 1799, the United States found itself engaged in an undeclared, quasi war. Adams persuaded Congress to cut off all trade with France, to abrogate the treaties of 1778, and to authorize American vessels to capture French armed ships on the high seas.

150 • CHAPTER 6


 In 1798, Congress created the Department of the Navy. The navy soon won a number of battles and captured a total of eighty-five French ships. The United States also began cooperating closely with the British. At last, the French began trying to ­conciliate the United States. Adams sent another commission to Paris in 1800, and the new French government (headed now by “First Consul” Napoleon Bonaparte) agreed to a treaty with the United States that canceled the old agreements of 1778 and established new ­commercial arrangements. As a result, the “war” came to a ­reasonably peaceful end.

Repression and Protest
 The conflict with France helped the Federalists increase their majorities in Congress in 1798. They now began to consider ways to silence the Republican opposition. The result was some of the most controversial legislation in American history: the Alien and Sedition Acts. The Alien Act placed new obstacles in the way of foreigners who wished to become The Alien and Sedition Acts American citizens. The Sedition Act allowed the government to prosecute those who engaged in “sedition” against the government. In theory, only libelous or treasonous activities were subject to prosecution; but since such activities had no clear definition, the law, in effect, gave the government authority to stifle virtually any opposition. The Republicans interpreted the new laws as part of a Federalist campaign to destroy them. President Adams signed the new laws but was cautious in implementing them. He did not deport any aliens, and he prevented the government from launching a broad crusade against the Republicans. But the Alien Act discouraged immigration and encouraged some foreigners already in the country to leave. And the administration used the Sedition Act to arrest and convict ten men, most of them Republican newspaper editors whose only crime had been criticism of the Federalists in government. Republican leaders began to look for ways to reverse the Alien and Sedition Acts. Some looked to the state legislatures for help. They developed a theory to justify action by the states against the federal government in two sets of resolutions of 1798– 1799, one written (anonymously) by Jefferson and adopted by the Kentucky legislaVirginia and Kentucky Resolutions ture, and the other drafted by Madison and approved by the Virginia legislature. The Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions, as they were known, used the ideas of John Locke and the Tenth Amendment to the Constitution to argue that the federal government had been formed by a “compact,” or contract, among the states and possessed only certain delegated powers. Whenever a state decided that the central government had exceeded those powers, it had the right to “nullify” the appropriate laws. The Republicans did not win wide support for the nullification idea; they did, however, succeed in elevating their dispute with the Federalists to the level of a national crisis. By the late 1790s, the entire nation was deeply and bitterly politicized. State legislatures at times resembled battlegrounds. Even the United States Congress was plagued with violent disagreements. In one celebrated incident in the chamber of the House of Representatives, Matthew Lyon, a Republican from Vermont, responded to an insult from Roger Griswold, a Federalist from Connecticut, by spitting in Griswold’s eye. Griswold attacked Lyon with his cane, Lyon fought back with a pair of fire tongs, and soon the two men were wrestling on the floor.

THE CONSTITUTION AND THE NEW REPUBLIC
• 151 

CONGRESSIONAL BRAWLERS, 1798
This cartoon was inspired by the celebrated fight on the floor of the House of Representatives between Matthew Lyon, a Republican representative from Vermont, and Roger Griswold, a Federalist from Connecticut. Griswold (at right) attacks Lyon with his cane, and Lyon retaliates with fire tongs. Other members of Congress are portrayed enjoying the battle. (The Library of Congress) 
The “Revolution” of 1800
 These bitter controversies shaped the presidential election of 1800. The presidential ­candidates were the same as four years earlier: Adams for the Federalists, Election of 1800 Jefferson for the Republicans. But the campaign of 1800 was very different from the one preceding it. Adams and Jefferson themselves displayed reasonable dignity, but their ­supporters showed no such restraint. The Federalists accused Jefferson of being a dangerous radical whose followers were wild men who, if they should come to power, would bring on a reign of terror comparable to that of the French Revolution. The Republicans portrayed Adams as a tyrant conspiring to become king, and they accused the Federalists of plotting to impose slavery on the people. The election was close, and the crucial c­ ontest was in New York. There, Aaron Burr mobilized an organization of Revolutionary War veterans, the Tammany Society, to serve as a Republican political machine. Through Tammany’s efforts, the party carried the city by a large majority, and with it the state. Jefferson was, apparently, elected. But an unexpected complication soon jeopardized the Republican victory. The Constitution called for each elector to “vote by ballot for two persons.” The expectation was that an elector would cast one vote for his party’s presidential candidate and the other for his party’s vice presidential candidate. To avoid a tie, the Republicans had intended that one elector would refrain from voting for the party’s vice presidential candidate, Aaron Burr. But when the votes were counted, Jefferson and Burr each had 73. No ­candidate had a majority, and the House of Representatives had to choose between the two top candidates, Jefferson and Burr. Each state delegation would cast a single vote. The new Congress, elected in 1800 with a Republican majority, was not to convene until after the inauguration of the president, so it was the Federalist Congress that had to decide the question. After a long deadlock, several leading Federalists concluded, following

152 • CHAPTER 6


 Hamilton’s advice, that Burr was too unreliable to trust with the presidency. On the thirtysixth ballot, Jefferson was elected. After the election of 1800, the only branch of the federal government left in Federalist hands was the judiciary. The Adams administration spent its last months in office taking The Judiciary Act of 1801 steps to make the party’s hold on the courts secure. With the Judiciary Act of 1801, the Federalists reduced the number of Supreme Court justiceships by one but greatly increased the number of federal judgeships as a whole. Adams quickly appointed Federalists to the newly created positions. He also appointed a leading Federalist, John Marshall, to be chief justice of the Supreme Court, a position Marshall held for 34 years. Indeed, there were charges that he stayed up until midnight on his last day in office to finish signing the new judges’ commissions. These officeholders became known as the “midnight appointments.” Even so, the Republicans viewed their victory as almost complete. The nation had, they believed, been saved from tyranny. The exuberance with which the victors viewed the future—and the importance they ascribed to the defeat of the Federalists—was evident in the phrase Jefferson himself later used to describe his election. He called it the “Revolution of 1800.”

CONCLUSION
 The Constitution of 1787 created a federal system of dispersed authority, authority divided among national and state governments and among an executive, a legislature, and a judiciary. The young nation thus sought to balance its need for an effective central government against its fear of concentrated and despotic power. The ability of the delegates to the Constitutional Convention to compromise revealed their yearning for a stable political system. The same willingness to compromise allowed the greatest challenge to the ideals of the new democracy—slavery—to survive intact. The writing and ratifying of the Constitution settled some questions about the shape of the new nation. The first twelve years under the government created by the Constitution solved others. And yet by the year 1800, a basic disagreement about the future of the nation remained unresolved and was creating bitter divisions and ­conflicts within the political world. The election of Thomas Jefferson to the presidency that year opened a new chapter in the nation’s public history. It also brought to a close, at least temporarily, savage political conflicts that had seemed to threaten the nation’s future.

KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
Alexander Hamilton 142
Alien and Sedition Acts 150
Antifederalists 140
Bill of Rights 142
 checks and balances 137 Constitution 140 federalism 136 Federalists 140

Great Compromise 136
James Madison 136
 Jay’s Treaty 148 John Adams 141 New Jersey Plan 135 Pinckney’s Treaty 148 quasi war 149 Republicans 144

Revolution of 1800 152
 separation of powers 137 The Federalist Papers 140 Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions 150 Virginia Plan 135 Whiskey Rebellion 147 XYZ Affair 149

THE CONSTITUTION AND THE NEW REPUBLIC
• 153 

RECALL AND REFLECT
 1. How did the Constitution of 1787 attempt to resolve the weaknesses of the Articles of

Confederation?
 2. What role did The Federalist Papers play in the battle over ratification of the Constitution? 3. What were the main tenets of Alexander Hamilton’s financial program? 4. What diplomatic crises did the United States face in the first decade of its existence, and how

 did the new government respond to these crises? 5. What was the “Revolution of 1800” and in what way was it a revolution?



THE
JEFFERSONIAN
ERA
THE RISE OF CULTURAL NATIONALISM
STIRRINGS OF INDUSTRIALISM
JEFFERSON THE PRESIDENT
DOUBLING THE NATIONAL DOMAIN
EXPANSION AND WAR
THE WAR OF 1812


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. How successful was Jefferson’s effort to create a “republican” society dominated by sturdy, independent farmers? 2. How did the Napoleonic Wars affect the United States? 3. What events and issues led to the War of 1812?

THOMAS JEFFERSON AND HIS FOLLOWERS
assumed control of the national government in 1801 as the champions of a distinctive vision of America. They favored a society of sturdy, independent farmers, happily free from the workshops, the industrial towns, and the urban mobs of Europe. They celebrated localism and republican simplicity. Above all, they proposed a federal government of sharply limited power. Almost nothing worked out as they had planned, for during their years in power the young republic was developing in ways that made much of their vision obsolete. The American economy became steadily more diversified and complex, making the ideal of a simple, agrarian society impossible to maintain. American cultural life was dominated by a vigorous and ambitious nationalism. Jef﻿﻿ferson himself contributed to the changes by exercising strong national authority at times and by arranging the greatest single increase in the size of the United States in its history. 
154 •


THE RISE OF
CULTURAL
NATIONALISM
 In many respects, American cultural life in the early nineteenth century reflected the Republican vision of the nation’s future. Opportunities for education increased, the nation’s literary and artistic life began to free itself from European influences, and American religion began to adjust to the spread of Enlightenment ­rationalism. In other ways, however, the new culture was posing a serious challenge to Republican ideals.

Educational and Literary
Nationalism
 Central to the Republican vision of America was the concept of a virtuous and enlightened citizenry. Republicans believed, therefore, in the creation of a nationwide system of public schools in which all male citizens would receive free education. Such hopes were not fulfilled. Schooling remained primarily the responsibility of private institutions, most of which were open only to those who could afford to pay for them. In the South and in the mid-Atlantic states, most schools were run by religious groups. In New England, private academies were often more secular, many of them modeled on those founded by the Phillips family at Andover, Massachusetts, in 1778, and at Exeter, New Hampshire, three years later. Many were frankly aristocratic in outlook. Some educational institutions were open to the poor, but not nearly enough to accommodate everyone, and the education they offered was usually clearly inferior to that provided for more prosperous students. Private secondary schools such as those in New England generally accepted only male students; even many public schools excluded females from the classroom. Yet the late eighteenth and early nineteenth c­enturies did see some important advances in education for

TIME LINE
 Eli Whitney invents cotton gin U.S. capital moves to Washington Second Great Awakening begins Louisiana Purchase Marbury v. Madison



 Marshall named chief justice of Supreme Court 1804–1806 Lewis and Clark expedition

 Jefferson reelected Embargo Madison elected president

Non-Intercourse Act




Tecumseh Confederacy
 formed

 Macon’s Bill No. 2 Battle of Tippecanoe U.S. declares war on Great Britain Madison reelected

Hartford Convention
Treaty of Ghent


Battle of New Orleans


• 155


