254 • CHAPTER 11


 cotton economies might have forced the region to shift its attention to other, nonagricultural pursuits had it not been for the growing importance of a new product that soon Short-Staple Cotton overshadowed all else: short-staple cotton. It was a hardier and coarser strain of cotton that could grow successfully in a variety of climates and soils. It was harder to process than the long-staple cotton because its seeds were difficult to remove from the fiber. But the invention of the cotton gin in 1793 had largely solved that problem. Demand for cotton increased rapidly in Britain in the 1820s and 1830s and in New England in the 1840s and 1850s. From the western areas of South Carolina and Georgia, production moved into Alabama and Mississippi and then into northern Louisiana, Texas, and Arkansas. By the 1850s, cotton had become the linchpin of the southern economy. By the time of the Civil War, cotton constituted nearly two-thirds of the total export trade of the United States. It was little wonder that southern politicians now proclaimed, “Cotton is king!” Cotton production boomed in the lower South (later known as the “Deep South”). Some began to call it the “cotton kingdom.” The prospect of tremendous profits drew settlers to the lower South by the thousands. Some were wealthy planters from the older states, but most were small slaveholders or slaveless farmers who hoped to move into the planter class. A similar shift, if an involuntary one, occurred in the slave population. Between 1840 and 1860, hundreds of thousands of slaves moved from the upper South to the cotton states—either accompanying masters who were themselves migrating to the lower South or (more often) sold to planters already there. This “second middle passage,” as the historian Ira Berlin has called it (using a term usually associated with the transatlantic slave trade), was a traumatic experience for perhaps a million dislocated African Americans. Slave families were b­ roken up and scattered across the expand“Second Middle Passage” ing cotton kingdom. Marched over hundreds of rugged miles, tied together in “coffles” (as on the earlier slave ships coming from Africa), they arrived in unfamiliar and usually forbidding territory, where they were made to construct new plantations and work in cotton fields. The sale of slaves to the lower South became an important economic activity for whites in the upper South, where agricultural production was declining.

Southern Trade and Industry
 In the face of this booming agricultural expansion, other forms of economic activity were slow to develop in the South. Flour milling and textile and iron manufacturing grew, particularly in the upper South, but industry remained a relatively insignificant force in comparison with the agricultural economy. The total value of southern textile manufactures in 1860 was $4.5 million—a threefold increase over the value of those goods twenty years before. But the value of the exports was approximately $200 million. The limited nonfarm commercial sector that did develop in the South was largely intended to serve the needs of the plantation economy. Particularly important were the brokers, or “factors,” who, in the absence of banks, marketed the planters’ crops and provided them with credit. Other obstacles to economic development included the South’s inadequate transportation system. Canals were almost nonexistent; most roads were crude and unsuitable for heavy transport; and railroads, although they expanded substantially in the 1840s and 1850s, failed to tie the region together effectively. Despite the lack of canals, the principal means of transportation was still water. Planters generally shipped their crops to market along rivers or by sea; most manufacturing was in or near port towns. The South, therefore, was becoming more and more dependent on the industrial manufacturers, merchants, and professionals of the North. Concerned by this trend, some

COTTON, SLAVERY, AND THE OLD SOUTH
• 255 

 southerners began to advocate economic independence for the region, among them James D. B. De Bow of New Orleans, whose magazine, De Bow’s De Bow’s Commercial Review Commercial Review, called for southern commercial expansion and economic independence from the North. Yet even De Bow’s Commercial Review was filled with advertisements from northern manufacturing firms; and its circulation was far smaller in the South than such northern magazines as Harper’s Weekly.

Sources of Southern Difference
 An important question about antebellum southern history concerns why the region did so little to develop a larger industrial and commercial economy of its own. Why did it remain so different from the North? Part of the reason was the great profitability of the region’s agricultural system. In the Northeast, many people had turned to manufacturing as the agricultural economy of the region declined. In the South, the agricultural economy was booming, and ambitious capitalists had little incentive to look elsewhere. Another reason was that wealthy southerners had so much capital invested in land and slaves that they had little left for other investments. Some historians have also suggested that the southern climate—with its long, hot, steamy summers—was less suitable for industrial development than the climate of the North.

 Edgar Degas, the renowned French painter, painted this scene of cotton traders examining samples in the New Orleans cotton exchange in 1873. By this time the cotton trade was producing less impressive profits than those that had made it the driving force of the booming southern economy of the 1850s. Degas’s mother came from a Creole family of cotton brokers in New Orleans, and two of the artist’s brothers (depicted here reading a newspaper and leaning against a window) joined the business in America. (© Musee des Beaux-Arts, Pau, France/Bridgeman Images)

THE NEW ORLEANS COTTON EXCHANGE


256 • CHAPTER 11


 But this southern failure was also due in part to a set of values distinctive to the South. Many white southerners liked to think of themselves as representatives of a special way of life. They argued that grace and refinement were more important than rapid growth and development. But appealing as this image was to southern whites, it conformed to the reality of southern society in very limited ways.

SOUTHERN WHITE SOCIETY
 Only a very small minority of southern whites owned slaves. In 1860, when the white population was just above 8 million, the number of slaveholders was only 383,637. Even with all members of slaveowning families included in the figures, those living in slaveowning households still amounted to perhaps no more than one-quarter of the white population. And only a small proportion of this relatively small number of slaveowners owned slaves in substantial numbers. Yet as the cotton economy surged in the late 1850s, white supporters championed its value to southern society and argued for a ruling planter class and working slave class. (See “Consider the Source: Senator James Henry Hammond Declares, ‘Cotton Is King.’”)

TENN.
I dle


 ha R i ama Alt

Woods


N.C.
S.C.


GEORGIA


 ver

Savannah
Altamaha R.


FLA.


Pa st u re


TOTAL AREA: 4,500
acres CROPLAND: 840 acres Plantation road 
Pumpkins


PLANTATION BUILDINGS
 Owner’s residence Service buildings Slave quarters

Barley


CROPS
Cotton


Idl e


Rice
Corn
Cane


Woods




2000 ft
250 m


500 m


Potatoes
Peas
 Other crops

A GEORGIA PLANTATION
This map of the Hopeton Plantation in South Carolina shows both how much plantations were connected to the national and world markets and how much they tried to be self-sufficient. Note the large areas of land devoted to the growing of cotton, rice, and sugarcane, all crops for the market. • Why would a plantation in this part of the South be so much more diversified in the market crops it raised than the cotton plantations in the Mississippi Delta? Note also the many crops grown for the local market or for consumption by residents of the plantation—potatoes, peas, corn, and others. The top left of the map shows the distribution of living quarters, with slaves’ quarters grouped together very near the owner’s residence. • Why would planters want their slaves living nearby? Why might slaves be unhappy about being so close to their owners? 
COTTON, SLAVERY, AND THE OLD SOUTH
• 257 

The Planter Class
 How, then, did the South come to be seen as a society dominated by wealthy slaveowning planters? In large part, it was because the planter aristocracy exercised power and influence far in excess of its numbers. White southerners liked to compare their planter class to the old aristocracies of England and Europe, but the comparison was not a sound one. In some areas of the upper South, the great aristocrats were indeed people whose families had occupied positions of wealth and power for generations. In most of the South, however, many of the great landowners were still first-generation settlers as late as the 1850s, who had only relatively recently started to live in the comfort and luxury for which they became famous. Large areas of the South had been settled and cultivated for less than two decades at the time of the Civil War. Nor was the world of the planter nearly as leisured and genteel as the aristocratic myth would suggest. Growing staple crops was a tough business. Planters were just as much competitive capitalists as the industrialists of the North. Even many affluent planters lived rather modestly, their wealth so heavily invested in land and slaves that there was often little left for personal comfort. And white planters, including some substantial ones, tended to move frequently as new and presumably more productive areas opened up to cultivation. Wealthy southern whites sustained their image as aristocrats in many ways. They adopted an elaborate code of “chivalry,” which obligated white men to defend their “honor,” often through dueling. They tended to avoid such “coarse” occupations as trade and commerce; those who did not become planters often gravitated toward the military. The aristocratic ideal also found reflection in the definition of a special The Aristocratic Ideal role for southern white women.

The “Southern Lady”
 In some respects, affluent white women in the South occupied roles very similar to those of middle-class white women in the North. Their lives generally centered in the home, where (according to the South’s social ideal) they served as companions to and hostesses for their husbands and as nurturing mothers for their children. “Genteel” southern white women seldom engaged in public activities or found income-producing employment. But the life of the “southern lady” was also very different from that of her northern counterpart. For one thing, the cult of honor dictated that southern white men give particular importance to the defense of women. In practice, this generally meant that white men were even more dominant and white women even Regional Differences in Women’s Lives more subordinate in southern culture than they were in the North. Social theorist George Fitzhugh wrote in the 1850s: “Women, like children, have but one right, and that is the right to protection. The right to protection involves the obligation to obey.” More important in determining the role of southern white women, however, was that the vast majority of them lived on farms, with little access to the “public world” and thus few opportunities to look beyond their roles as wives and mothers. For many white women, living on farms of modest size meant a fuller engagement in the economic life of the family than was typical for middle-class women in the North. These women engaged in spinning, weaving, and other production; they participated in agricultural tasks; they helped supervise the slave workforce. On the larger plantations, however, even these limited roles were often considered unsuitable for white women, and the “plantation ­mistress” became, in some cases, more an ornament for her husband than an active part

CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
SENATOR JAMES HENRY HAMMOND DECLARES,
IS KING,” 1858
 James Henry Hammond, a U.S. senator from South Carolina, was a leading advocate for the overwhelming significance of cotton to the economy of the South and the nation. He famously made his point in 1858 in his “Cotton Is King” speech. If we never acquire another foot of territory for the South, look at her. Eight hundred and fifty thousand square miles. As large as Great Britain, France, Austria, Prussia, and Spain. Is not that territory enough to make an empire that shall rule the world? . . . With the finest soil, the most delightful climate, whose staple productions none of those great countries can grow, we have three thousand miles of continental shore line, so indented with bays and crowded with ­islands, that, when their shore lines are added, we have twelve thousand miles. Through the heart of our country runs the great Mississippi, the father of waters, into whose bosom are poured thirty-six thousand miles of tributary streams; and beyond we have the desert prairie wastes, to ­protect us in our rear. Can you hem in such a territory as that? . . . [. . .] Upon our muster-rolls we have a ­million of militia. In a defensive war, upon an emergency, every one of them would be available. At any time, the South can raise, equip, and maintain in the field, a larger army than any Power of the earth can send against her, and an army of soldiers—men brought up on horseback, with guns in their hands. [. . .] It appears, by going to the reports of the Secretary of the Treasury, which are authentic, that last year the United States exported in round numbers $279,000,000 worth of domestic produce, excluding gold and foreign merchandise re-exported. Of this amount $158,000,000 worth is the clear produce of the South; . . . 258 •

 [. . .] [W]e have nothing to do but to take off restrictions on foreign merchandise and open our ports, and the whole world will come to us to trade. They will be too glad to bring and carry for us, and we never shall dream of a war. Why the South has never yet had a just cause of war. Every time she has drawn her sword it has been on the point of honor, and that point of honor has been mainly ­loyalty to her sister colonies and sister States, who have ever since plundered and calumniated her. But if there were no other reason why we should never have war, would any sane nation make war on cotton? Without firing a gun, without drawing a sword, should they make war on us we can bring the whole world to our feet. The South is ­perfectly competent to go on, one, two, or three years without planting a seed of ­cotton. I believe that if she was to plant but half her cotton for three years to come, it would be an immense advantage to her. I am not so sure but that after three total years’ abstinence she would come out stronger than ever she was before and ­better prepared to enter afresh upon her great career of enterprise. . . . England would topple headlong and carry the whole civilized world with her, save the South. No, you dare not make war on cotton. No power on earth dares to make war upon it. Cotton is king. In all social systems there must be a class to do the menial duties, to perform the drudgery of life. That is, a class requiring but a low order of intellect and but ­little skill. Its requisites are vigor, docility, fidelity. . . . Fortunately for the South, she found a race adapted to that purpose to her hand—a race inferior to her own, but eminently qualified in temper, in vigor, in

 docility, in capacity to stand the climate, UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE to answer all her purposes. We use them for our purpose, and call them slaves. We 1. How did Hammond describe the South in comparison to the North? Compare this found them slaves by the “common conassessment with the experience of the sent of mankind,” which, according to South in the Civil War. How did Hammond Cicero, “lex naturae est”; the highest proof view the South in a global context? What of what is Nature’s law. We are old-­ do you think of this assessment? fashioned at the South yet; it is a word discarded now by “ears polite.” I will not 2. What justifications did Hammond offer for slavery? Describe the comparison characterize that class at the North by Hammond drew between northern wage that term; but you have it; it is there; it is labor and southern slavery? everywhere; it is eternal. Source: James Henry Hammond, Speech on the Kansas-Lecompton Constitution, U.S. Senate, March 4, 1858, in Congressional Globe, 35th Cong., 1st Sess., Appendix, pp. 70–71; in Regina Lee Blaszczyk and Philip B. Scranton (eds.), Major Problems in American Business History (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 2006), pp. 149–154.

 of the economy or the society. Southern white women also had less access to education than their northern counterparts. The few female “academies” in the South trained women primarily to be suitable wives. Southern white women had other special burdens as well. The southern white birthrate remained nearly 20 percent higher than that of the nation as a whole, but Special Burdens infant mortality in the region remained higher than elsewhere. The slave labor system also had a mixed impact on white women. It helped spare many of them from certain kinds of arduous labor, but it also damaged their relationships with their husbands. Male slaveowners had frequent forced sexual relationships with the female slaves on their plantations; the ­children of those unions served as a constant reminder to white women of their husbands’ infidelities. Black women (and men) were obviously the most important victims of such practices, but white women suffered, too.

The Plain Folk
 The typical white southerner was a yeoman farmer. Some of these “plain folk,” as they became known, owned a few slaves, with whom they worked and lived more closely than did the larger planters. Some plain folk, most of whom owned their own land, devoted themselves largely to subsistence farming; others grew cotton or other crops for the market but usually could not produce enough to allow them to expand their operations or even get out of debt. One reason was the southern educational system. For the sons of wealthy planters, the region provided ample opportunities to gain an education. In 1860, there were 260 southern colleges and universities, public and private, with 25,000 students enrolled in them. But as in the rest of the United States, universities were only within the reach of the upper class. The elementary and secondary schools of the South were not only fewer than but also inferior to those of the Northeast. The South had more than 500,000 ­illiterate whites, over half the nation’s total. The subordination of the plain folk to the planter class raises an important question: Why did lower-class whites not oppose the aristocratic social ­system from which they benefited so little? • 259

260 • CHAPTER 11


 Some nonslaveowning whites did oppose the planter elite, but for the most part in limited ways and in isolated areas. These were mainly the “hill people,” who lived in the Appalachian ranges east of the Mississippi, in the Ozarks to the west of the river, and in other “hill country” or “backcountry” areas. They practiced a simple form of subsistence agriculture, owned practically no slaves, and were, in most respects, unconnected to the cotton economy. Such whites frequently expressed animosity toward the planter aristocracy. Unsurprisingly, the mountain regions were the only parts of the South to resist the movement toward secession in the early 1860s. Even during the Civil War itself, many refused to support the Confederacy. Far greater in number, however, were the nonslaveowning whites who lived in the midst of the plantation system. Many, perhaps most of them, accepted that system because they were tied to it in important ways. Small farmers depended on the local plantation aristocracy for access to cotton gins, markets for their modest crops and their livestock, and credit or other financial assistance in time of need. In many areas, moreover, the poorest resident of a county might easily be a cousin of the richest aristocrat. In the 1850s, the cotton boom allowed many small farmers to improve their economic fortunes. Some bought more land, became s­ laveowners, and moved into at least the fringes of plantation society. Others simply felt more secure in their positions as independent yeomen and hence were more likely to embrace the fierce regional loyalty that was spreading throughout the white South in these years. There were other white southerners, however, who were known at the time variously as “crackers,” “sand hillers,” or “poor white trash.” Occupying the infertile lands of the pine barrens, the red hills, and the swamps, they lived in genuine squalor. Many owned no land Poorest Whites and supported themselves by foraging or hunting. Others worked at times as common laborers for their neighbors. Their degradation resulted partly from dietary deficiencies and disease. Forced to resort at times to eating clay (hence the tendency of moreaffluent whites to refer to them disparagingly as “clay eaters”), they suffered from pellagra, hookworm, and malaria. Planters and small farmers alike held them in contempt. Even among these southerners—the true outcasts of white society—there was no real opposition to the plantation system or slavery. In part, this was because they were so benumbed by Shared Sense of Racial Supremacy poverty that they had little strength to protest. But the single greatest unifying factor among the southern white population was their perception of race. However poor and miserable white southerners might be, they could still look down on the black population of the region and feel a bond with their fellow whites and a sense of racial supremacy. “Hill People”

SLAVERY: THE “PECULIAR INSTITUTION”
 White southerners often referred to slavery as the “peculiar institution,” meaning that it was distinctive, special. And indeed it was. The South in the mid-nineteenth century was the only area in the Western world—except for Brazil, Cuba, and Puerto Rico—where slavery still existed. Slavery, more than any other single factor, isolated the South from the rest of American society and much of the world. Within the South itself, slavery produced paradoxical results. On one hand, it isolated blacks from whites. As a result, African Americans under slavery began to develop a society and culture of their own. On the other hand, slavery created a unique bond between blacks and whites—slaves and masters—in the South. The two groups may have maintained separate spheres, but each sphere was deeply influenced by the other. In both cases, slavery profoundly affected all aspects of southern and even American society. (See “Debating the Past: The Character of Slavery.”)

COTTON, SLAVERY, AND THE OLD SOUTH
• 261 

Varieties of Slavery
 Southern slave codes forbade slaves to hold property, to leave their masters’ premises without permission, to be out after dark, to congregate with other slaves except Slave Codes at church, to carry firearms, to testify in court against white people, or to strike a white person even in self-defense. The codes prohibited whites from teaching slaves to read or write. The laws contained no provisions to legalize slave marriages or divorces. If an owner killed a slave while punishing him, the act was generally not considered a crime. Slaves, however, faced the death penalty for killing or even resisting a white person and for inciting revolt. The codes also contained extraordinarily rigid provisions for defining a person’s race. Anyone with a trace (or, often, even a rumor) of African ancestry was defined as black. Enforcement of the codes, however, was spotty and uneven. Some slaves did acquire property, did become literate, and did assemble with other slaves. White owners themselves handled most transgressions by their slaves and inflicted widely varying punishments. In other words, despite the rigid provisions of law, there was in reality considerable difference within the slave system. Some slaves lived in almost prisonlike conditions, rigidly and harshly controlled by their masters. Many (probably most) others experienced considerable flexibility and autonomy. The nature of the relationship between masters and slaves depended in part on the size of the plantation. White farmers with few slaves generally Plantation Size and Slave Experience supervised their workers directly and often worked closely alongside them. The paternal relationship between such masters and their slaves could be warm and benevolent, or tyrannical and cruel. In general, African Americans themselves preferred to live on larger plantations, where they had a chance for a social world of their own. Although the majority of slaveowners were small farmers, the majority of slaves lived on plantations of medium or large size, with substantial slave workforces. Thus the relationship between master and slave was much less intimate for the typical slave than for the typical slaveowner. Substantial planters often hired overseers and even assistant overseers to represent them. “Head drivers,” trusted and responsible slaves often assisted by several subdrivers, acted under the overseer as foremen.

 Life under Slavery Most, but not all, slaves received an adequate if rude diet, consisting mainly of cornmeal, salt pork, molasses, and, on rare occasions, fresh meat or poultry. Many slaves cultivated gardens for their own use. Their masters provided them with cheap clothing and shoes. They lived in rough cabins, called slave quarters. The plantation mistress or a doctor retained by the owner provided some medical care, but slave women themselves—as “healers,” midwives, or simply as mothers—often were the more important source of medical attention. Slaves worked hard, beginning with light tasks as children. Their workdays were longest at harvesttime. Slave women worked particularly hard. They Work Conditions ­generally labored in the fields with the men, and they also handled cooking, cleaning, and child rearing. Many slave families were divided. Husbands and fathers often lived on neighboring plantations; at times, one spouse (usually the male) would be sold to a plantation owner far away. As a result, black women often found themselves acting in effect as single parents. Slaves were, as a group, much less healthy than southern whites. After 1808, when the importation of slaves became illegal, the proportion of blacks to whites in the nation as a whole steadily declined as a result of the comparatively high black death rate.

DEBATING THE PAST


The Character of Slavery
 No issue in American history has produced a more spirited debate than the ­nature of plantation slavery. The debate began well ­before the Civil War, when a­bolitionists strove to expose slavery to the world as a brutal, dehumanizing institution, while southern defenders of slavery tried to ­depict it as a benevolent and paternalistic system. But by the late nineteenth century, with white Americans eager for sectional conciliation, most northern and southern chroniclers of slavery began to accept a romanticized and unthreatening picture of the Old South and its peculiar ­institution. The first major scholarly examination of slavery was Ulrich B. Phillips’s American Negro Slavery (1918), which portrayed slavery as an essentially benign institution in which kindly masters looked after submissive and generally contented African Americans. Phillips’s apologia for slavery remained the authoritative work on the subject for nearly thirty years. In the 1940s, challenges to Phillips began to emerge. Melville J. Herskovits disputed Phillips’s contention that black Americans retained little of their African cultural inheritance. Herbert Aptheker published a chronicle of slave revolts as a way of refuting Phillips’s claim that blacks were submissive and content. A somewhat different challenge to Phillips emerged in the 1950s from historians who emphasized the brutality of the institution. Kenneth Stampp’s The Peculiar Institution (1956) and Stanley Elkins’s Slavery (1959) described a labor system that did serious physical and psychological damage to its victims. They portrayed ­slavery as something like a prison, in which men and women 262 •

 had virtually no space to develop their own social and cultural lives. Elkins compared the ­system to Nazi concentration camps and likened the childlike “Sambo” personality of slavery to tragic distortions of character produced by the Holocaust. In the early 1970s, an explosion of new scholarship on slavery shifted the emphasis away from the damage the system inflicted on African Americans and toward the striking success of the slaves themselves in building a culture of their own. John Blassingame in 1973 argued that “the most remarkable aspect of the whole process of enslavement is the extent to which the American-born slaves were able to retain their ancestors’ culture.” Herbert Gutman, in The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom (1976), challenged the prevailing belief that slavery had weakened and even destroyed the African American family. On the contrary, Gutman argued, the black family survived slavery with impressive strength, although with some significant differences from the prevailing form of the white family. Eugene Genovese’s Roll, Jordan, Roll (1974) revealed how African Americans manipulated white paternalist assumptions to build a large c­ ultural space of their own where they could develop their own family life, social traditions, and ­religious patterns. That same year, Robert Fogel and Stanley Engerman published the controversial Time on the Cross, a highly quantitative study that supported some of the claims of Gutman and Genovese about black achievement but that went much ­further in portraying slavery as a successful and reasonably humane (if u ­ ltimately immoral) system. Slave workers, they ­argued, were better treated and lived in greater

 This 1855 photograph of a slave woman and master’s child is documentary evidence of the complex relationships that historians of slavery have studied. (The Library of Congress) NURSING THE MASTER’S CHILD

 comfort than most northern i­ndustrial workers of the same era. Their conclusions produced a storm of criticism. Other important scholarship includes African American slave women. Elizabeth Fox-Genovese’s Within the Plantation Household (1988) examined the lives of both white and black women on the plantation. She portrayed slave women as defined by their dual roles as members of the plantation workforce and ­anchors of the black family. Slave women, she argued, professed loyalty to their mistresses when forced to serve them as domestics; but their real loyalty remained to their own ­communities and families. More recent studies by Walter Johnson and Ira Berlin mark an at least partial return to the “damage” approach to slavery of the 1970s. Johnson’s Soul by Soul (2000) examines the South’s largest slave market, New Orleans. For whites, he argues, purchasing slaves was a way of fulfilling the middle-class male fantasy

 of success and independence. For the slaves themselves, the trade was dehumanizing and destructive to black families and communities. Berlin’s Many Thousands Gone (2000) and Generation of Captivity (2003)—among the most important studies of slavery in a generation—similarly emphasize the dehumanizing character of the slave market and show that, whatever white slaveowners might say, slavery was less a social system than a commodification of human beings.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. Why might the conclusions drawn by

Robert Fogel and Stanley Engerman
 in Time on the Cross have provoked ­vehement criticism? 2. What might be some reasons for the resurrection of focus on the “damage” thesis of slavery, as in the works by Walter Johnson and Ira Berlin? • 263

264 • CHAPTER 11


CLEAR STARCHING IN LOUISIANA
This 1837 etching by French artist Auguste Hervieu depicts a plantation mistress verbally abusing a slave woman and child. Hervieu traveled to America with British writer and abolitionist Frances Trollope. This illustration is from Trollope’s 1836 novel The Life and Adventures of Jonathan Jefferson Whitlaw: Or, Scenes on the Mississippi, a work that exposed the degrading effects of slavery on both slaves and slaveowners. (The Life and Adventures of Jonathan Jefferson Whitlaw, by Frances Trollope, 1836) 
 Slave ­mothers had large families, but the enforced poverty in which virtually all African Americans lived ensured that fewer of their children would survive to adulthood than the High Mortality Rates children of white parents. Even those who did survive typically died at a younger age than the average white person. Household servants had a somewhat easier life—physically at least—than did field hands. On a small plantation, the same slaves might do both field work and housework. But on a large estate, there would generally be a separate domestic staff: nursemaids, housemaids, cooks, butlers, coachmen. These people lived close to the master and his ­family, eating the leftovers from the family table. Between the blacks and whites of such households, affectionate, almost familial relationships might develop. More often, however, house servants resented their isolation from their fellow slaves and the lack of privacy and increased discipline that came with living in such close proximity to the master’s family. When emancipation came after the Civil War, it was often the house servants who were the first to leave the plantations of their former owners. Female household servants were especially vulnerable to sexual abuse by their masters and Sexual Abuse white overseers. In addition to being subjected to unwanted sexual attention from white men, female slaves often received vindictive treatment from white women. Plantation mistresses naturally resented the sexual liaisons between their husbands and female slaves. Punishing their husbands was not usually possible, so they often punished the slaves instead— with arbitrary beatings, increased workloads, and various forms of psychological torment.

Slavery in the Cities
 The conditions of urban slavery differed significantly from those in the countryside. On the relatively isolated plantations, slaves had little contact with free blacks and lower-class whites, and masters maintained a fairly direct and effective control. In the city, however,

COTTON, SLAVERY, AND THE OLD SOUTH
• 265 

 a master often could not supervise his slaves closely and at the same time use them profitably. Even if they slept at night in carefully watched backyard barracks, they moved about during the day alone, performing errands of various kinds. There was a considerable market in the South for common laborers, particularly since, unlike in the North, there were few European immigrants to perform menial chores. As a result, masters often hired out slaves for such tasks. Slaves on contract worked in mining and lumbering (often far from cities), but others worked on the docks and on construction sites, drove wagons, and performed other unskilled jobs in cities and towns. Slave women and children worked in the region’s few textile mills. Particularly skilled workers such as blacksmiths or carpenters were also often hired out. After regular working hours, many of them fended for themselves; thus urban slaves gained numerous opportunities to mingle with free blacks and with whites. In the cities, the line between slavery and freedom was less distinct than on the plantation.

Free African Americans
 Over 250,000 free African Americans lived in the slaveholding states by the start of the Civil War, more than half of them in Virginia and Maryland. In some cases, they were slaves who had somehow earned money to buy their own and their families’ freedom. It was most often urban blacks, with their greater freedom of movement and activity, who could take that route. One example was Elizabeth Keckley, a slave woman Elizabeth Keckley who bought freedom for herself and her son with proceeds from sewing. She later became a seamstress, personal servant, and companion to Mary Todd Lincoln in the White House. But few masters had any incentive, or inclination, to give up their slaves, so this route was open to relatively few people. Some slaves were set free by a master who had moral qualms about slavery, or by a master’s will after his death—for example, the more than 400 slaves belonging to John Randolph of Roanoke, freed in 1833. From the 1830s on, New Restrictions on Manumission however, state laws governing slavery became stricter, in part in response to the fears Nat Turner’s revolt created among white southerners. The new laws made it more difficult, and in some cases practically impossible, for owners to set free (or manumit) their slaves. A few free blacks attained wealth and prominence. Some even owned slaves themselves, usually relatives whom they had bought to ensure their ultimate emancipation. In a few ­cities— New Orleans, Natchez, and Charleston—free black communities managed to flourish with relatively little interference from whites and with some economic stability. Most southern free blacks, however, lived in abject poverty. Yet, great as were the hardships of freedom, blacks much preferred it to slavery.

The Slave Trade
 The transfer of slaves from one part of the South to another was one of the most important and terrible consequences of slavery. Sometimes slaves moved to the new cotton lands in the company of their original owners, who were migrating themselves. More often, however, the transfer occurred through the efforts of professional slave traders. The traders took slaves to such central markets as Natchez, New Orleans, Mobile, and Charleston, where purchasers bid for them. A sound young field hand could fetch a price that might vary in the 1840s and 1850s from $500 to $1,700, depending on fluctuations in the market (and the health and age of the slaves).

266 • CHAPTER 11


 The domestic slave trade, essential to the growth and prosperity of the system, was one of its most horrible aspects. The trade dehumanized all who were involved in it. It separated children from parents, and parents from each other. Even families kept together by scrupulous owners might be broken up in the division of the estate after the master’s death. Planters might deplore the trade, but they eased their consciences by holding the traders in contempt. The foreign slave trade was bad or worse. Although federal law had prohibited the importation of slaves from 1808 on, some continued to be smuggled into the United States as late as the 1850s when the supply of slaves was inadequate. At the annual southern commercial conventions, planters began to discuss the legal reopening of the trade. “If it is right to buy slaves in Virginia and carry them to New Orleans,” William L. Yancey asked his fellow delegates in 1858, “why is it not right to buy them in Cuba, Brazil, or Africa.” The convention that year voted to repeal all the laws against slave imports, but the government never acted on their proposal. The continued smuggling of slaves was not without resistance. In 1839, a group of 53 slaves in Cuba took charge of a ship, the Amistad, that was transporting them to another port in Cuba. Their goal was to sail back to their homelands in Africa. The slaves had no experience with sailing, and they tried to compel the crew to steer them across the Atlantic. Instead, the ship sailed up the Atlantic Coast until it was captured by a ship of the United States Revenue Service. Many Americans, including President Van Buren, thought the slaves should be returned to Cuba. But at the request of a group of abolitionists, former president John Quincy Adams went before the Supreme Court to argue that they should be freed. Adams argued that the foreign slave trade was illegal and thus the Amistad rebels could not be returned to slavery. The Court accepted his argument in 1841, and most of the former slaves were returned to Africa, with funding from American abolitionists.

 The offices of slave dealers were familiar sights on the streets of pre–Civil War southern cities and towns. They provide testimony to the way in which slavery was not just a social system but a business, deeply woven into the fabric of southern economic life. (The Library of Congress) THE BUSINESS OF SLAVERY

COTTON, SLAVERY, AND THE OLD SOUTH
• 267 

 Two years later, another group of slaves revolted on board a ship and took control of it—this time an American vessel bound from Norfolk, Virginia, to New Orleans, Louisiana—and steered it (and its 135 slaves) to the British Bahamas, where slavery was illegal and the slaves were given sanctuary. Such shipboard revolts were rare, but they were symbols of the continued effort by Africans to resist slavery.

Slave Resistance
 Slaveowners liked to argue that the slaves were generally content, “happy with their lot.” But it is clear that the vast majority of southern blacks yearned for freedom and detested the peculiar institution. Evidence for that can be found, if nowhere else, in the reaction of slaves when emancipation finally came. Virtually all reacted to freedom with great joy; few chose to remain in the service of the whites who had owned them before the Civil War. Rather than contented acceptance, the dominant response of African Americans to slavery was a complex one: a combination of adaptation and resistance. At the extremes, slavery could produce two very different reactions, each of which served as the basis for a powerful stereotype in white society. One extreme was what became known as the “Sambo”—the shuffling, grinning, head-scratching, deferential slave who acted out what he recognized as the role the white world expected of him. But the Sambo pattern of behavior was a charade put on by blacks, a façade assumed in the presence of whites. The other extreme was the slave rebel—the African American who resisted either acceptance or accommodation but remained forever rebellious. Actual slave revolts were extremely rare, but the knowledge that they were Slave Revolts possible struck terror into the hearts of white southerners. In 1800, Gabriel Prosser gathered 1,000 rebellious slaves outside Richmond; but two African Americans gave away the plot, and the Virginia militia stymied the uprising before it could begin. Prosser and thirty-five others were executed. In 1822, the Charleston free black Denmark Vesey and his followers—rumored to total 9,000—made preparations for revolt; but again word leaked out and suppression and retribution followed. On a summer night in 1831, Nat Turner, a slave preacher, led a band of African Americans armed with guns and axes from house to house in Southampton County, Virginia. They killed sixty white men, women, and children before being overpowered by state and federal troops. More than a hundred blacks were executed in the aftermath. For the most part, however, resistance to slavery took other, less violent forms. Some blacks attempted to resist by running away. A small number managed to escape to the North or to Canada, especially after sympathetic whites and free blacks began organizing secret escape routes, known as the “underground railroad,” to assist them in flight. But the odds against a successful escape were very high. The hazards of distance and the slaves’ ignorance of geography were serious obstacles, as were the white “slave patrols,” which stopped wandering blacks on sight and demanded to see travel permits. Despite all the obstacles to success, however, blacks continued to run away from their masters in large numbers. Perhaps the most important method of resistance was simply a pattern of everyday behavior by which blacks defied their masters. That whites so often considered Day-to-Day Slave Resistance blacks to be lazy and shiftless suggests one means of resistance: refusal to work hard. Some slaves stole from their masters or from neighboring whites. Others performed isolated acts of sabotage: losing or breaking tools or performing tasks improperly. In extreme cases, blacks might make themselves useless by cutting off their fingers or even committing suicide. A few turned on their masters and killed them. The extremes, however, were rare. For the most part, blacks resisted by building subtle methods of rebellion into their normal patterns of behavior.

268 • CHAPTER 11


THE CULTURE OF SLAVERY
 Resistance was only part of the slave response to slavery. Another was an elaborate process of adaptation. One of the ways blacks adapted was by developing their own, separate culture, one that enabled them to sustain a sense of racial pride and unity.

Slave Religion
 Almost all African Americans were Christians by the early nineteenth century. Some had converted voluntarily and others in response to coercion from their masters and Protestant missionaries who evangelized among them. Masters expected their slaves to join their denominations and worship under the supervision of white ministers. A separate slave religion was not supposed to exist. Indeed, autonomous black churches were banned by law. Nevertheless, blacks throughout the South developed their own version of Christianity, at times incorporating into it such practices as voodoo or other polytheistic religious traditions of Africa. Or they simply bent religion to the special circumstances of bondage. African American religion was often more emotional than its white counterpart and reflected the influence of African customs and practices. Slave prayer meetings routinely involved fervent chanting, spontaneous exclamations from the congregation, and ecstatic Praying for Freedom conversion experiences. Black religion was also generally more joyful and affirming than that of many white denominations. And above all, African American religion emphasized the dream of freedom and deliverance. In their prayers and songs and

 Harriet Tubman (ca. 1820–1913) was born into slavery in Maryland. In 1849, when her master died, she escaped to Philadelphia to avoid being sold out of state. Over the next ten years, she assisted first members of her own family and then up to 300 other slaves to escape from Maryland to freedom. She is shown here, on the far left, with some of the slaves she had helped free. (© Archive Photos/Getty Images) HARRIET TUBMAN WITH ESCAPED SLAVES

COTTON, SLAVERY, AND THE OLD SOUTH
• 269 

 sermons, black Christians talked and sang of the day when the Lord would “call us home,” “deliver us to freedom,” or “take us to the Promised Land.” While whites generally chose to interpret such language merely as the expression of hopes for life after death, many blacks used the images of Christian salvation to express their own dreams of f­reedom in the present world.

Language and Music
 In many areas, slaves retained a language of their own. Having arrived in America speaking many different African languages, the first generations of slaves had as much difficulty communicating with one another as they did with white people. To overcome these barriers, they learned a simple, common language (known to linguists as “pidgin”). It “Pidgin” retained some African words, but it drew primarily, if selectively, from English. And while slave language grew more sophisticated as blacks spent more time in America, some features of this early pidgin survived in black speech for many generations. Music was especially important in slave society. Again, the African heritage was an important influence. African music relied heavily on rhythm, and so did black music in America. Slaves often created instruments for themselves out of whatever materials were at hand. The banjo became important to slave music. But more important were voices and song. Field workers often used songs to pass the time; since they sang them in the presence of the whites, they usually attached relatively innocuous words to them. But African Americans also created more politically challenging music in the relative privacy of their own religious services. It was there that the tradition of the spiritual emerged. Importance of Slave Spirituals Through the spiritual, Africans in America not only expressed their religious faith, but also lamented their bondage and expressed continuing hope for freedom. Slave songs were rarely written down and often seemed entirely spontaneous; but much slave music was really derived from African and Caribbean traditions passed on through generations. Performers also improvised variations on songs they had heard. When the setting permitted it, African Americans danced to their music—dances very different from and much more spontaneous than the formal steps that nineteenth-century whites generally learned. They also used music to accompany another of their important cultural traditions: storytelling.

The Slave Family
 The slave family was the other crucial institution of black culture in the South. Like religion, it suffered from legal restrictions. Nevertheless, what we now call the “nuclear family” consistently emerged as the dominant kinship model among African Americans. Black women generally began bearing children at younger ages than most whites, often as early as fourteen or fifteen (sometimes as a result of unwanted sexual relations with their masters). Slave communities did not condemn premarital pregnancy in the way white society did, and black couples would often begin living together before marrying. It was customary, however, for couples to marry—in a ceremony involving Slave Marriages formal vows—soon after conceiving a child. Husbands and wives on neighboring plantations sometimes visited each other with the permission of their masters, but often such visits had to be in secret, at night. Family ties among slaves were generally no less strong than those of whites.

270 • CHAPTER 11


 When marriages did not survive, it was often because of circumstances over which blacks had no control. Up to a third of all black families were broken apart by the slave trade. Extended kinship networks were strong and important and often helped compensate for the breakup of nuclear families. A slave forced suddenly to move to a new area, far from his or her family, might create fictional kinship ties and become “adopted” by a family in the new community. Even so, the impulse to maintain contact with a spouse and children remained strong long after the breakup of a family. One of the most frequent causes of flight from the plantation was a slave’s desire to find a husband, wife, or child who had been sent elsewhere. After the Civil War, white and black newspapers were filled with notices from former slaves seeking to reconnect with family members separated ­during bondage. However much blacks resented their lack of freedom, they often found it difficult to maintain an entirely hostile attitude toward their owners. They depended on whites for the material means of existence—food, clothing, and shelter—and they relied on them as well for security and protection. There was, in short, a paternal relationship between slave Paternalism and master—sometimes harsh, at other times kindly, but always important. That paternalism, in fact, became a vital instrument of white control. By creating a sense of mutual dependence, whites helped minimize though never eliminated resistance to an institution that served only the interests of the ruling race.

CONCLUSION
 While the North was creating a complex and rapidly developing commercial-industrial economy, the South was expanding its agrarian economy without making many fundamental changes in the region’s character. Great migrations took many southern whites, and even more African American slaves, into new agricultural areas in the Deep South, where they created a booming “cotton kingdom.” The cotton economy created many great fortunes and some modest ones. It also entrenched the planter class as the dominant force within southern society—both as owners of vast numbers of slaves and as patrons, creditors, politicians, landlords, and marketers for the large number of poor whites who lived on the edge of the planter world. The differences between the North and the South were a result of differences in natural resources, social structure, climate, and culture. Above all, they were the result of the existence within the South of an unfree labor system that prevented the kind of social fluidity that an industrializing society usually requires. Within that system, however, slaves created a vital, independent culture and religion in the face of white subjugation.

KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
 abolitionist 262 Amistad 266 cotton kingdom 254 cult of honor 257 Denmark Vesey 267

Elizabeth Keckley 265
Gabriel Prosser 267
James Henry
Hammond 258
 manumission 265

Nat Turner 267
 peculiar institution 260 planter class 257 second middle passage 254 slave codes 261

COTTON, SLAVERY, AND THE OLD SOUTH
• 271 

RECALL AND REFLECT
 Why did cotton become the leading crop of the South? Why did industry fail to develop in the South to the extent that it did in the North? How did slavery function economically and socially? What was the effect of slavery on white slaveowners? On slaves? On nonslaveowning whites? On free blacks? 5. Through what means did slaves maintain a distinct African American culture?

1.
2.
3.
4.




ANTEBELLUM
CULTURE AND
REFORM
THE ROMANTIC IMPULSE
REMAKING SOCIETY
THE CRUSADE AGAINST SLAVERY


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. How did an American national culture of art, literature, philosophy, and communal living develop in the nineteenth century? 2. What were the issues on which social and moral reformers tried to “remake the nation”? How successful were their efforts? 3. Why did the crusade against slavery become the preeminent issue of the reform movement?

THE UNITED STATES IN THE
mid-nineteenth century was growing rapidly in size, population, and economic complexity. Most Americans were excited by the new possibilities these changes produced. But many people were also painfully aware of the problems that accompanied them. One result of these conflicting attitudes was the emergence of movements to “reform” the nation. Some reforms rested on an optimistic faith in human nature, a belief that within every individual resided a spirit that was basically good and that society should attempt to unleash. A second impulse was a desire for order and control. With their traditional values and institutions being challenged and eroded, many Americans yearned above all for stability and discipline. By the end of the 1840s, however, one issue—slavery—had come to overshadow all others. And one group of reformers—the abolitionists—had become the most influential of all. 
272 •


THE ROMANTIC IMPULSE
 “In the four quarters of the globe,” wrote the English wit Sydney Smith in 1820, “who reads an American book? or goes to an American play? or looks at an American picture or statue?” The answer, he assumed, was obvious: no one. American intellectuals were painfully aware of the low regard in which Europeans held their culture, and they tried to create an artistic life that would express their own nation’s special virtues. At the same time, many of the nation’s cultural leaders were striving for another kind of liberation, which was—ironically—largely an import from Europe: the spirit of romanticism. In literature, in philosophy, in art, even in politics and economics, American intellectuals were committing themselves to the liberation of the human spirit.

Nationalism and Romanticism in
American Painting
 Despite Sydney Smith’s contemptuous question, a great many people in the United States were, in fact, looking at American paintings—and they were doing so because they believed Americans were creating important new artistic traditions of their own. American painters sought to capture the power of nature by portraying some of the nation’s most spectacular and undeveloped areas. The first great school of American painters—known as the Hudson River school—emerged in New York. Frederic Church, Thomas Cole, Thomas Doughty, Asher Durand, and others painted the spectacular vistas of the rugged and still largely untamed Hudson Valley. Like Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau, whom many of the painters read and admired, they considered nature—far more than civilization—the best source of wisdom ­ and fulfillment. In portraying the Hudson Valley, they seemed to announce that in

TIME LINE
 New York constructs first penitentiary Cooper’s The Last of the Mohicans Joseph Smith publishes the Book of Mormon The Liberator begins publication

American Antislavery
 Society founded

 Horace Mann appointed secretary of Massachusetts Board of Education

 Liberty Party formed

 Brook Farm founded



 Frederick Douglass’s autobiography

 Women’s rights convention at Seneca Falls, N.Y. Oneida Community founded



 Hawthorne’s The Scarlet Letter

 Melville’s Moby Dick



 Stowe’s Uncle Tom’s Cabin

 Thoreau’s Walden Whitman’s Leaves of Grass

• 273


