110 • CHAPTER 5


 It was simple common sense, Paine wrote, for Americans to break completely with a political system that could inflict such brutality on its own people. Common Sense sold more than 100,000 copies in only a few months and helped build support for the idea of independence in the early months of 1776. (For more on the origins of the rebellion, see “Debating the Past: The American Revolution.”)

The Declaration of Independence
 In the meantime, the Continental Congress in Philadelphia was moving toward a complete break with England. At the beginning of the summer, it appointed a committee to draft a formal declaration of independence; and on July 2, 1776, it adopted a resolution: “That these Independence Declared United Colonies are, and, of right, ought to be, free and independent states; that they are absolved from all allegiance to the British crown, and that all political connexion between them and the state of Great Britain is, and ought to be, totally dissolved.” Two days later, on July 4, Congress approved the Declaration of Independence itself, which provided formal justifications for this resolution. The Declaration launched a period of energetic political innovation, as one colony after another reconstituted itself as a “state.” By 1781, most states had produced written constitutions for themselves. At the national level, however, the process was more uncertain. In Articles of Confederation November 1777, finally, Congress adopted a plan for union, the Articles of Confederation. The document confirmed the existing weak, decentralized system. Thomas Jefferson, a thirty-three-year-old Virginian, wrote most of the Declaration, with Thomas Jefferson help from Benjamin Franklin and John Adams. The Declaration expressed concepts that had been circulating throughout the colonies over the previous few months in the form of at least ninety other, local “declarations of independence”—declarations drafted up and down the coast by town meetings, artisan and militia organizations, county officials, grand juries, Sons of Liberty, and colonial assemblies. Jefferson borrowed heavily from these texts. The final document had two parts. In the first, the Declaration restated the familiar contract theory of John Locke: that governments were formed to protect what Jefferson called “life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.” In the second part, it listed the alleged crimes of the king, who, with the backing of Parliament, had violated his contract with the colonists and thus had forfeited all claim to their loyalty.

Mobilizing for War
 Financing the war was difficult. Congress had no authority to levy taxes on its own, and when it requisitioned money from the state governments, none contributed more than a small part of its expected share. Congress had little success borrowing from the public, since few Americans could afford to buy bonds. Instead, Congress issued paper money. Printing presses turned out enormous amounts of “Continental currency,” and the states printed currencies of their own. The result, predictably, was soaring inflation, and Congress soon found that the Continental currency was virtually worthless. Ultimately, Congress financed the war mostly by borrowing from other nations. After a first surge of patriotism in 1775, volunteer soldiers became scarce. States had to pay bounties or use a draft to recruit the needed men. At first, the militiamen remained under the control of their respective states. But Congress recognized the need for a centralized military command, and it created a Continental army with a single commander in

THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION
• 111 

 Jean Baptist de Verger, a French officer serving in America during the Revolution, kept an illustrated journal of his experiences. Here he portrays four American soldiers carrying different kinds of arms: a black infantryman with a light rifle, a musketman, a rifleman, and an artilleryman. (©Brown University Library, Providence, Rhode Island, USA/Bridgeman Images) REVOLUTIONARY SOLDIERS

 chief: George Washington. Washington, an early advocate of independence with considerable military experience, was admired, respected, and trusted by nearly all Patriots. He took command of the new army in June 1775. With the aid of foreign military experts such as the Marquis de Lafayette from France and the Baron von Steuben from Prussia, he built a force that prevailed against the mightiest power in the world. Even more important, perhaps, Washington’s steadiness, courage, and dedication to his cause Washington Takes Command ­provided the army—and the people—with a symbol of stability around which they could rally.

THE WAR FOR INDEPENDENCE
 As the War for Independence began, the British seemed to have overwhelming advantages: the greatest navy and the best-equipped army in the world, the resources of an empire, a coherent structure of command. Yet the United States had advantages, too. Americans were fighting on their own ground. They were more committed to the conflict than were the British. And, beginning in 1777, they received substantial aid from abroad. But the American victory was also a result of a series of early blunders and miscalculations by the British. It was, finally, a result of the transformation of the war—through three distinct phases—into a new kind of conflict that the British military, for all its strength, was unable to win.

The First Phase: New England
 For the first year of the conflict—from the spring of 1775 to the spring of 1776—many English authorities thought that British forces were not fighting a real war, but simply quelling pockets of rebellion in the contentious area around Boston. After the redcoats

112 • CHAPTER 5


Battle of Quebec
Dec. 31, 1775


MON
TGO


BRITISH CANADA


LD


Siege of Quebec
Nov. 1775–Mar. 1776


N
AR


AR


O


QUEBEC


LD
NO


 Trois Rivières June 7, 1776 Y ER M

Montreal


MAINE
(Mass.)


Halifax


NOVA
SCOTIA


Crown Point
Fort Ticonderoga


Lake
Ontario


Lake
George


Kennebec R.


YLER


 ce ren Lake w Champlain La Valcour Island Oct. 11, 1776

SCHU


St
.


R.


May 12, 1775


ATLANT I C OC E AN


May 10, 1775


NEW
HAMPSHIRE
HOWE


Albany




Boston


MASSACHUSETTS
Hudson R.


NEW YORK


 x) 17 alifa (to H

R.I.
CONNECTICUT


HOW


Ne
E (to


 rk) w Yo British forces American forces



100 mi


 British victory

200 km


THE REVOLUTION IN THE NORTH, 1775—1776
After initial battles in and around Boston, the British forces left Massachusetts and (after a brief stay in Halifax, Canada) moved south to New York. In the meantime, American forces moved north in an effort to capture British strongholds in Montreal and Quebec, with little success. • Why would the British have considered New York a better base than Boston? 
 withdrew from Lexington and Concord in April, American forces besieged them in Boston. In the Battle of Bunker Hill (actually fought on Breed’s Hill) on June 17, 1775, the Patriots suffered severe casualties and withdrew. But they inflicted even greater losses on the enemy. The siege continued. Early in 1776, finally, the British decided that Boston was a poor place from which to fight. It was in the center of the most anti-British part of America and tactically difficult to defend because it was easily isolated and surrounded. And so, on March 17, 1776, the redcoats evacuated Boston for Halifax, Nova Scotia, with hundreds of Loyalist refugees (Americans still loyal to England and the king). In the meantime, a band of southern Patriots, at Moore’s Creek Bridge in North Carolina, crushed an uprising of Loyalists on February 27, 1776. And to the north, the Americans Invasion of Canada began an invasion of Canada. Generals Benedict Arnold and Richard Montgomery unsuccessfully threatened Quebec in late 1775 and early 1776 in a battle in which Montgomery was killed and Arnold was wounded. By the spring of 1776, it had become clear to the British that the conflict was not just a local phenomenon. The American campaigns in Canada, the agitation in the South, and the growing evidence of colonial unity all suggested that England must prepare to fight a much larger conflict. Bunker Hill

The Second Phase: The Mid-Atlantic Region
 During the next phase of the war, which lasted from 1776 until early 1778, the British were in a good position to win. Indeed, had it not been for a series of blunders and misfortunes, they probably would have crushed the rebellion.

THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION
• 113 

 The British regrouped quickly after their retreat from Boston. During the summer of 1776, hundreds of British ships and 32,000 British soldiers arrived in New York, under the command of General William Howe. He offered Congress a choice: William Howe ­surrender with royal pardon or face a battle against apparently overwhelming odds. To oppose Howe’s great force, Washington could muster only about 19,000 soldiers; he had no navy at all. Even so, the Americans rejected Howe’s offer. The British then pushed the Patriot forces out of Manhattan and off Long Island and drove them in slow retreat over the plains of New Jersey, across the Delaware River, and into Pennsylvania. The British settled down for the winter in northern and central New Jersey, with an outpost of Hessians at Trenton, on the Delaware River. But Washington did not sit still. On Christmas night 1776, he daringly recrossed the icy Delaware River, surprised and scattered the Hessians, and occupied Trenton. Then he advanced to Trenton and Princeton Princeton and drove a force of redcoats from their base in the college there. But Washington was unable to hold either Princeton or Trenton and finally took refuge in the hills around Morristown. Still, the campaign of 1776 came to an end with the Americans having triumphed in two minor battles and with their main army still intact. For the campaigns of 1777, the British devised a strategy to divide the United States in two. Howe would move from New York up the Hudson to Albany, while another force

BURGOYNE


Oriskany
Aug. 6, 1777


Mo h a


MASSACHUSETTS


Trenton


Schenectady
ARNOLD


R.I.
CONNECTICUT


Schoharie


White Plains
Oct. 28, 1776
Harlem Heights
Sept. 16, 1776
Brooklyn Heights
Aug. 27, 1776
New York
City


Albany


WASHINGTON


PENNSYLVANIA
Princeton
Jan. 3, 1777


TROOP MOVEMENTS
 British forces American forces BATTLES

DELAWARE


 American victory

E
HOW
WA
SHIN
GTON
Brandywine
Creek
Sept. 11, 1777
TON
ING
.
SH
 eR WA ar

WASHIN
G
1778 TON




Germantown
Oct. 4, 1777


IN
CL


D
 el a

HOWE 1


DEL.


 w

Monmouth
Courthouse
June 28, 1778


Trenton
Dec. 26, 1776,
 and Jan. 2, 1777

Philadelphia




MARYLAND


 British victory

WASHINGTON








Valley Forge
Winter
Headquarters
1777–1778




Philadelphia


NEW
JERSEY


RK


Bennington
Aug. 16, 1777
Bennington


NEW JERSEY


HOWE


PENNSYLVANIA


R.


LD


R.


West
Point


Morristown Winter
Headquarters
Jan.–May 1777


Valley Forge


 wk

SER




 are R. aw

 l

Huds
 on

Kingston
De


ARN
O


FR
A


GA
T ES


Albany


NEW YORK


Saratoga


STA


NEW YORK


NEW
HAMPSHIRE


Huds
 on R .

Fort Stanwix
Aug. 23, 1777


Burgoyne
Surrenders
Oct. 17, 1777
Saratoga
Oct. 7, 1777


TO
N


Lake
Ontario


Fort Edward


Fort Ticonderoga
July 5, 1777
200 km


NW 776
AL L
IS 1


100 mi




CO
R




 These maps illustrate the major campaigns of the Revolution in the middle colonies—New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania—between 1776 and 1778. The large map on the left shows the two prongs of the British strategy: first, a movement of British forces south from Canada into the Hudson Valley and, second, a movement of other British forces, under General William Howe, out from New York. The strategy was designed to trap the American army between the two British movements. • What movements of Howe helped thwart that plan? The two smaller maps on the right show a detailed picture of some of the major battles. The upper one reveals the surprising American victory at Saratoga. The lower one shows a series of inconclusive battles between New York and Philadelphia in 1777 and 1778.

THE REVOLUTION IN THE MIDDLE COLONIES, 1776—1778


114 • CHAPTER 5


 would come down from Canada to meet him. John Burgoyne, commander of the northern force, began a two-pronged attack to the south along both the Mohawk and the upper Hudson approaches to Albany. But having set the plan in motion, Howe strangely abandoned his part of it. Instead of moving north to meet Burgoyne, he went south and captured Philadelphia, hoping that his seizure of the rebel capital would bring the war to a speedy conclusion. Philadelphia fell with little resistance—and the Continental Congress moved into exile in York, Pennsylvania. After launching an unsuccessful attack against the British on October 4 at Germantown ( just outside Philadelphia), Washington went into winter quarters at Valley Forge. Howe’s move to Philadelphia left Burgoyne to carry out the campaign in the north alone. He sent Colonel Barry St. Leger up the St. Lawrence River toward Lake Ontario. Burgoyne himself advanced directly down the upper Hudson Valley and easily seized Fort Ticonderoga. But Burgoyne soon experienced two staggering defeats. In one of them—at Oriskany, New York, on August 6—Patriots held off St. Leger’s force of Indians and Loyalists. That allowed Benedict Arnold to close off the Mohawk Valley to St. Leger’s advance. In the other battle—at Bennington, Vermont, on August 16—New England militiamen mauled a detachment that Burgoyne had sent to seek supplies. Short of materials, with all help cut off, Burgoyne fought several costly engagements and then withdrew to Patriot Victory at Saratoga Saratoga, where General Horatio Gates surrounded him. On October 17, 1777, Burgoyne surrendered. The campaign in upstate New York was not just a British defeat. It was a setback for the ambitious efforts of several Iroquois leaders. Although the Iroquois Confederacy had declared its neutrality in the Revolutionary War in 1776, some of its members allied themselves with the British, among them a Mohawk brother and sister, Joseph and Mary Brant. This ill-fated alliance further divided the already weakened Joseph and Mary Brant Iroquois Confederacy, because only three of the Iroquois nations (the Mohawk, the Seneca, and the Cayuga) followed the Brants in support of the British. A year after the defeat at Oriskany, Iroquois forces joined British troops in a series of raids on white settlements in upstate New York. Patriot forces under the command of General John Sullivan harshly retaliated, wreaking such destruction on Indian settlements that large groups of Iroquois fled north into Canada to seek refuge. Many never returned.

John Burgoyne


 Securing Aid from Abroad The leaders of the American effort knew that victory would not be likely without aid from abroad. Their most promising allies, they realized, were the French, who stood to gain from seeing Britain lose a crucial part of its empire. At first, France provided the United States with badly needed supplies. But they remained reluctant to formally acknowledge the new nation, despite the efforts of Benjamin Franklin in Paris to lobby for aid and diplomatic recognition. France’s foreign minister, the Count de Vergennes, wanted evidence that the Americans had a real chance of winning. The British defeat at Saratoga, he believed, offered that evidence. When the news from Saratoga arrived in London and Paris in early December 1777, a shaken Lord North made a new peace offer: complete home rule within the empire for Americans if they would quit the war. Vergennes feared the Americans might accept the French Diplomatic Recognition offer and thus destroy France’s opportunity to weaken Britain. Encouraged by Franklin, he agreed on February 6, 1778, to give formal recognition to the United States and to provide it with greatly expanded military assistance.

THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION
• 115 

 France’s decision made the war an international conflict, which over the years pitted France, Spain, and the Netherlands against Great Britain. That helped reduce the resources available for the English effort in America. But France remained America’s most important ally.

The Final Phase: The South
 The American victory at Saratoga and the intervention of the French transformed the war. Instead of mounting a full-scale military struggle against the American army, the British now tried to enlist the support of those elements of the American Britain’s Southern Strategy population who were still loyal to the crown. Since Loyalist sentiment was strongest in the South, and since the English also hoped slaves would rally to their cause, the main focus of the British effort shifted there. The new strategy failed dismally. British forces spent three years (from 1778 to 1781) moving through the South. But they had badly overestimated the extent of Loyalist sentiment. And they had underestimated the logistical problems they would face. Patriot forces could move at will throughout the region, blending in with the civilian population and PENNSYLVANIA British forces

 ac R

 French fleet British victory

NEW
JERSEY


MARYLAND


 m to Po

 American forces

.


Ja
 me

 sR

.


OCHAMBEAU


Yorktown
Aug. 30–
Oct. 19,


Richmond


Chesapeake
Bay


&G


Charlottesville


HO
OD


T TE
LAFAYE


N&R
GTO
S H IN
WA


VIRGINIA


RAV
ES


DELAWARE


 American victory

Cape
Charles


LL I
S


ENE
GR E


Guilford Court House
Mar. 15, 1781


L


R.


GEORGIA


Eutaw Springs
Sept. 8, 1781


Briar Creek
Mar. 3, 1779


Charleston
May 12, 1780


EVO
ST


TON
CLIN


&C


NW
OR


ALL


C
AR
IS M


ATLAN T IC
OC E AN


H1




LL 1


PBE


CAM


Savannah
Occ. by British
Dec. 29, 1778


PR


R.


 h na

Augusta
Occ. by British
Jan. 29, 1779


SOUTH
CAROLINA


E


Cape
Lookout


Wilmington


Dee


 v an

Camden
Aug. 16, 1780


 e Pe

Sa
Kettle Creek
Feb. 14, 1779


.


CORNWALLIS M


R
TA


 rR

ET
ON


Cape
Hatteras
New Bern


S
AS
GR


EN
E


 a Fe

AN
MORG


S
TE
GA


Cape


 King’s Mountain Oct. 7, 1780

GR
E


DE


Cowpens
Jan. 17, 1781


NORTH
CAROLINA
AY 1781


A
CORNW


N




D’ESTAING
Sept.–Oct. 1779




100 mi


200 km


THE REVOLUTION IN THE SOUTH, 1778—1781
The final phase of the American Revolution occurred largely in the South, which the British thought would be a more receptive region for their troops. • Why did they believe that? This map reveals the many scattered military efforts of the British and the Americans in those years, none of them conclusive. It also shows the final chapter of the Revolution around the Chesapeake Bay and the James River. • What errors led the British to their surrender at Yorktown? 
AMERICA IN THE WORLD


The Age of Revolutions
 The American Revolution was a result of tensions and conflicts between imperial Britain and its North American colonies. But it was also both a part, and a cause, of what historians have come to call an “age of revolutions,” which spread through much of the Western world in the last decades of the eighteenth century and the first decades of the nineteenth. The modern idea of revolution—the overturning of old systems and regimes and the creation of new ones—was to a large degree a product of the ideas of the Enlightenment. Among those ideas was the notion of popular sovereignty, articulated by, among others, the English philosopher John Locke. Locke argued that political authority did not derive from the divine right of kings or the inherited authority of aristocracies, but from the consent of the governed. A related Enlightenment idea was the concept of individual freedom, which challenged the traditional belief that governments had the right to prescribe the way people act, speak, and even think. Champions of individual freedom in the eighteenth century—among them the French philosopher Voltaire—advocated religious toleration and freedom of thought and expression. The Enlightenment also helped spread the idea of political and legal equality for all people—the end of special privileges for aristocrats and elites and the right of all citizens to participate in the formation of policies and laws. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, a SwissFrench theorist, helped define these new ideas of equality. Together, Enlightenment ideas formed the basis for challenges to existing social orders in many parts of the Western world, and eventually beyond it. The American Revolution was the first and in many ways most influential of the Enlightenment-derived uprisings against 116 •

 e­ stablished orders. It served as an inspiration to people in other lands who opposed unpopular regimes. In 1789, a little over a decade after the beginning of the American Revolution, dissenters rebelled in France—at first through a revolt by the national legislature against the king, and then through a series of increasingly radical challenges to established authority. The monarchy was abolished (and the king and queen publicly executed in 1793), the authority of the Catholic Church was challenged and greatly weakened, and at the peak of revolutionary chaos during the Jacobin period (1793–1794), over 40,000 suspected enemies of the revolution were executed and hundreds of thousands of others imprisoned. The radical phase of the revolution came to an end in 1799, when Napoleon Bonaparte, a young general, seized power and began to build a new French empire. But France’s ancien regime of king and aristocracy never wholly revived. Together, the French and American revolutions helped inspire uprisings in many other parts of the Atlantic World. In 1791, a major slave revolt began in Haiti and soon attracted over 100,000 rebels. The army of enslaved people defeated both the white settlers of the island and the French colonial armies sent to quell their rebellion. Under the leadership of Toussaint-Louverture, they began to agitate for independence, which they obtained on January 1, 1804, a few months after Toussaint’s death. The ideas of these revolutions spread next into Spanish and Portuguese colonies in the Americas, particularly among the so-called Creoles, people of European ancestry born in the Americas. In the late eighteenth century, they began to resist the continuing authority of colonial officials from Spain and Portugal and to demand a greater say in governing their own lands. When Napoleon’s French armies

 This painting portrays the storming of the great Parisian fortress and prison, the Bastille, on July 14, 1789. The Bastille was a despised symbol of royal tyranny to many of the French, because of the arbitrarily arrested and imprisoned people who were sent there. The July assault was designed to release the prisoners, but in fact the revolutionaries found only seven people in the vast fortress. Even so, the capture of the Bastille—which marked one of the first moments in which ordinary Frenchmen joined the Revolution—became one of the great moments in modern French history. The anniversary of the event, “Bastille Day,” remains the French national holiday. (© Musee de la Ville de Paris, Musee Carnavalet, Paris, France/Bridgeman Images) STORMING THE BASTILLE

 invaded Spain and Portugal in 1807, they weakened the ability of the European regimes to sustain authority over their American colonies. In the years that followed, revolutions swept through much of Latin America. Mexico became an independent nation in 1821, and provinces of Central America that had once been part of Mexico (Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica) established their independence three years later. Simón Bolívar, modeling his efforts on those of George Washington, movement that helped inspire revolutionary campaigns in Venezuela, Ecuador, and Peru—all of which won their independence in the 1820s. At about the same time, Greek patriots— drawing from the examples of other revolutionary nations—launched a movement to win their independence from the Ottoman Empire, which finally succeeded in 1830. The age of revolutions left many new, independent nations in its wake. It did not, however, succeed in establishing the ideals of

 popular sovereignty, individual freedom, and political equality in all the nations it affected. Slavery survived in the United States and in many areas of Latin America. New forms of aristocracy and even monarchy emerged in France, Mexico, Brazil, and elsewhere. Women—many of whom had hoped the revolutionary age would win them new rights— made few legal or political gains in this era. But the ideals that the revolutionary era introduced to the Western world continued to shape the histories of nations throughout the nineteenth century and beyond.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. How did the American Revolution influ-

 ence the French Revolution, and how were other nations affected by it? 2. What was the significance of the revolution in Haiti, and how much attention did it get in other nations? • 117

118 • CHAPTER 5


 leaving the British unable to distinguish friend from foe. The British, by contrast, suffered all the disadvantages of an army in hostile territory. It was this phase of the conflict that made the war “revolutionary”—not only because “Revolutionary” Phase it introduced a new kind of warfare, but because it had the effect of mobilizing and politicizing large groups of the population. With the war expanding into previously isolated communities, and with many civilians forced to involve themselves whether they liked it or not, the political climate of the United States grew more heated than ever. And support for independence, far from being crushed, greatly increased. In the North, the fighting settled into a stalemate. Sir Henry Clinton replaced the unsuccessful William Howe in May 1778 and moved what had been Howe’s army from Philadelphia back to New York. The British troops stayed there for more than a year. In the meantime, George Rogers Clark led a Patriot expedition over the Appalachian Mountains and captured settlements in the Illinois country from the British and their Indian allies. On the whole, however, there was relatively little military activity in the North after 1778. There was, however, considerable intrigue. In the fall of 1780, American forces Benedict Arnold’s Betrayal were shocked by the exposure of treason on the part of General Benedict Arnold. Convinced that the American cause was hopeless, Arnold conspired with British agents to betray the Patriot stronghold at West Point on the Hudson River. When the scheme was exposed and foiled, Arnold fled to the safety of the British camp, where he spent the rest of the war. The British did have some significant military successes during this period. On December 29, 1778, they captured Savannah, Georgia. After taking the port of Charleston, South Carolina, on May 12, 1780, they advanced into the interior. Although the British were able to win conventional battles, they faced constant harrassment from such Patriot guerrillas as Thomas Sumter, Andrew Pickens, and Francis Marion, the “Swamp Fox.” Penetrating to Camden, South Carolina, Lord Cornwallis (whom Clinton named British commander in the South) met and crushed a Patriot force under Horatio Gates on August 16, 1780. Congress recalled Gates, and Washington replaced him with Nathanael Greene, one of the ablest American generals of his time. Even before Greene arrived in the South, the tide of battle had begun to turn against Cornwallis. At King’s Mountain (near the North Carolina–South Carolina border) on October 7, 1780, a band of Patriot riflemen from the backwoods killed, wounded, or captured every man in a force of 1,100 New York and South Carolina Loyalists upon whom Cornwallis had depended. Once Greene arrived, he confused and exasperated Cornwallis by dividing the American forces into fast-moving contingents while avoiding open, conventional battles. One of the contingents inflicted what Cornwallis admitted was “a very unexpected and severe blow” at Cowpens on January 17, 1781. Finally, after receiving reinforcements, Greene combined all his forces and maneuvered to meet the British at Guilford Court House, North Carolina. After a hard-fought battle there on March 15, 1781, Greene was driven from the field; but Cornwallis had lost so many men that he decided to abandon the Carolina campaign. Instead, he moved north, hoping to conduct raids in the interior of Virginia. But Clinton, fearful that the southern army might be destroyed, ordered him to take up a defensive position at Yorktown. American and French forces quickly descended on Yorktown. Washington and the Yorktown Count de Rochambeau marched a French-American army from New York to join the Marquis de Lafayette in Virginia, while Admiral de Grasse took a French fleet with additional troops up Chesapeake Bay to the York River. These joint operations caught Cornwallis between land and sea. After a few shows of resistance, he surrendered on October 17, 1781. Two days later, as a military band played “The World Turned Upside Down,” he surrendered his whole army of more than 7,000.

THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION
• 119 

Winning the Peace
 Cornwallis’s defeat provoked outcries in England against continuing the war. Lord North resigned as prime minister; Lord Shelburne emerged from the political wreckage to succeed him; and British emissaries appeared in France to talk informally with the American diplomats there—Benjamin Franklin, John Adams, and John Jay. The Americans were under instructions to cooperate with France in their negotiations with England. But Vergennes insisted that France could not agree to any settlement with England until its ally Spain had achieved its principal war aim: winning back Gibraltar from the British. There was no real prospect of that happening soon, and the Americans began to fear that the alliance with France might keep them at war indefinitely. As a result, the Americans began proceeding on their own, without informing Vergennes, and soon drew up a preliminary treaty with Great Britain, which was signed on November 30, 1782. Benjamin Franklin, in the meantime, skillfully pacified Vergennes Franklin’s Diplomacy and avoided an immediate rift in the French-American alliance. The final treaty, signed September 3, 1783, was, on the whole, remarkably favorable to the United States. It provided a clear-cut recognition of independence and a large, though ambiguous, cession of territory to the new nation—from the southern boundary of Canada to the northern boundary of Florida and from the Atlantic to the Mississippi. The American people had good reason to celebrate as the last of the British occupation forces embarked from New York. Dissenters around the world, too, found inspiration in news of the Revolution. (See “America in the World: The Age of Revolutions.”)

WAR AND SOCIETY
 Historians have long debated whether the American Revolution was a social as well as a political revolution. But whatever the intention of those who launched and fought the war, the conflict transformed American society.

Loyalists and Minorities
 Estimates differ as to how many Americans remained loyal to England during the Revolution, but it is clear that there were many—at least one-fifth (and some estimate as much as one-third) of the white population. Some were officeholders in the imperial government. Others were merchants whose trade was closely tied to the imperial system. Still others were people who lived in relative isolation and had simply retained their traditional loyalties. And there were those who, expecting the British to win the war, were currying favor with the anticipated victors. Many of these Loyalists were hounded by Patriots in their communities and harassed by legislative and judicial actions. Up to 100,000 fled the country. Those who could afford it moved to England. Others moved to Canada, establishing the first The Loyalists’ Plight English-speaking community in the French-speaking province of Quebec. Some returned to America after the war and gradually reentered the life of the nation. The war weakened other groups as well. The Anglican Church, many of whose members were Loyalists, lost its status as the official religion of Virginia and Maryland. By the time the fighting ended, many Anglican parishes could no longer even afford clergymen. Also weakened were the Quakers, whose pacifism gave them widespread unpopularity.

120 • CHAPTER 5


 Other Protestant denominations, however, grew stronger. Presbyterian, Congregational, and Baptist churches successfully tied themselves to the Patriot cause. Most American Catholics also supported the Patriots and won increased popularity as a result. Shortly after the peace treaty was signed, the Vatican provided the United States with its own hierarchy and, in 1789, its first bishop.

The War and Slavery
 For some African Americans, the war meant freedom because the British enabled many escaped slaves to leave the country as a way of disrupting the American war effort. In South Carolina, for example, nearly one-third of all slaves defected during the war. For other African Americans, the Revolution meant an increased exposure to the Exposure to Revolutionary Ideas ­concept, although seldom to the reality, of liberty. Most African Americans could not read, but few could avoid the new and exciting ideas circulating through the towns and cities and even the plantations where they lived. In several communities, slaves exposed to Revolutionary ideas engaged in open resistance to white control. In Charleston, South Carolina, for example, Thomas Jeremiah, a free black man, was executed after white authorities learned of elaborate plans for a slave uprising. Slaveowners opposed the British efforts to emancipate their slaves, but they also feared that the Revolution itself would foment slave rebellions. Although the ideals of the Revolution produced occasional challenges to slavery by white southerners (including laws in Virginia and Maryland permitting slaveowners to free—“manumit”—their slaves if they wished), white support for slavery survived. Southern churches, some of which flirted briefly with voicing objections to the system, quickly rejected the antislavery ideas of the North and worked instead to reinforce white superiority. In much of the North, by contrast, the combination of Revolutionary sentiment and evangelical Christian fervor helped spread antislavery sentiments widely through society. The first target was the slave trade, which was prohibited by several states (Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Connecticut among them). The antislavery movement next attacked state laws forbidding owners from freeing their slaves. Quakers and other antislavery activists succeeded in pressuring legislatures to allow legal emancipation in all the ­northern states, and even in Kentucky and Tennessee, before the end of the Revolution. The final step was emancipation of all slaves in a state. Pennsylvania was the first state, in 1780, to declare slavery illegal within its borders—again in part because of the influence of the Gradual Emancipation in the North fiercely antislavery Quakers. One by one, all the northern states except New York and New Jersey abolished slavery before the end of the Revolution. New York followed in 1799 and New Jersey in 1804. But northern emancipation was a gradual process in most states, despite changes in the law. A significant, although steadily dwindling, number of slaves remained in the North for several decades. The Revolution exposed the continuing tension between the nation’s commitment to liberty and its simultaneous commitment to slavery. To people in our time, and even to some people in Revolutionary times, liberty and slavery seem incompatible with each other. But to many white Americans in the eighteenth century, especially in the South, that did not seem obvious. Many white southerners believed, in fact, that enslaving Africans—whom they considered inferior and unfit for citizenship—was the best way to ensure liberty for white people. They feared that without slaves, it would be necessary to recruit a servile white workforce in the South, and that the resulting inequalities would jeopardize the survival of liberty. One of the ironies of the American Revolution was that

THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION
• 121 

 many white Americans were fighting both to secure freedom for themselves and to preserve slavery for others.

Native Americans and the Revolution
 Indians also viewed the American Revolution with considerable uncertainty. Most tribes ultimately chose to stay out of the war. But many Indians feared that the Revolution would replace a somewhat trustworthy ruling group (the British, who had tried to limit the expansion of white settlement into tribal land) with one they considered generally hostile to them (the Patriots, who had spearheaded the expansion). Thus some Indians chose to join the English cause. Still others took advantage of the conflict to launch attacks of their own. In the western Carolinas and Virginia, Cherokee led by Chief Dragging Canoe launched a series of attacks on outlying white settlements in the summer of 1776. Patriot militias responded in great force, ravaging Cherokee lands and forcing the chief and many of his followers to flee west across the Tennessee River. Those Cherokee who remained behind agreed to a new treaty by which they gave up still more land. Some Iroquois, despite the setbacks at Oriskany, continued to wage war against Americans in the West and caused widespread destruction in agricultural areas of New York and Pennsylvania. The retaliating American armies inflicted heavy losses on the Indians, but the attacks continued. In the end, the Revolution generally weakened the position of Native Americans in several ways. The Patriot victory increased white demand for western lands. Many whites resented the assistance such nations as the Mohawk had given the British and insisted on treating them as conquered people. Others drew from the Native American Position Weakened Revolution a paternalistic view of the tribes. Thomas Jefferson, for example, came to view the Indians as “noble savages,” uncivilized in their present state but redeemable if they were willing to adapt to the norms of white society. The triumph of the American Patriots in the Revolution contributed to the ultimate defeat of the Indian tribes. To white Americans, independence meant, among other things, their right to move aggressively into the western lands, despite the opposition of the Indians. To the Indians, American independence was “the greatest blow that could have been dealt us,” one tribal leader warned.

 Women’s Rights and Roles The long Revolutionary War had a profound effect on American women. The departure of so many men to fight in the Patriot armies left women in charge of farms and businesses. Often, women handled these tasks with great success. But in other cases, inexperience, inflation, the unavailability of male labor, or the threat of enemy troops led to failure. Some women whose husbands or fathers were called away to war did not have even a farm or shop to fall back on. Cities and towns had significant populations of impoverished women, who on occasion led protests against price increases, rioted, or looted food. At other times, women launched attacks on occupying British troops, whom they were required to house and feed at considerable expense. Not all women stayed behind when the men went off to war. Some joined their male relatives in the camps of the Patriot armies. These female “camp followers” increased army morale and provided a ready source of volunteers to cook, launder, nurse, and do other necessary tasks. In the rough environment of the camps, traditional gender distinctions proved difficult to maintain. Considerable numbers of women became involved, at least intermittently, in combat. A few women even disguised themselves as men to be able to fight.

CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
THE CORRESPONDENCE OF ABIGAIL ADAMS
ON WOMEN’S RIGHTS
(1776) Between March and May 1776, Abigail
 Adams exchanged letters with her husband John and with Mercy Otis Warren, one of the few female political writers of the day. In these notes, the correspondents discussed the matter of women’s rights in Revolutionary America. Abigail Adams to John Adams, March 31, 1776: I long to hear that you have declared an independancy [sic] and by the way in the new Code of Laws which I suppose it will be necessary for you to make I would desire you would Remember the Ladies, and be more generous and favourable to them than your ancestors. Do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the Husbands. Remember all men would be tyrants if they could. If particuliar care and attention is not paid to the Ladies we are determined to foment a Rebelion, and will not hold ourselves bound by any Laws in which we have no voice, or Representation. That your Sex are Naturally Tyrannical is a Truth so thoroughly established as to admit of no dispute, but such of you as wish to be happy willingly give up the harsh title of Master for the more tender and endearing one of Friend. Why then, not put it out of the power of the vicious and the Lawless to use us with cruelty and indignity with impunity. Men of Sense in all Ages abhor those customs which treat us only as the vassals of your Sex. Regard us then as Beings placed by providence under your protection and in immitation of the Supreme Being make use of that power only for our happiness. John Adams to Abigail Adams, April 14, 1776: As to Declarations of Independency, be patient. Read our Privateering Laws, and our Commercial Laws. What signifies a Word. 122 •

 As to your extraordinary Code of Laws, I cannot but laugh. We have been told that our Struggle has loosened the bands of Government every where. That Children and Apprentices were disobedient—that schools and Colleges were grown turbulent—that Indians slighted their Guardians and Negroes grew insolent to their Masters. But your Letter was the first Intimation that another Tribe more numerous and powerful than all the rest were grown discontented. This is rather too coarse a Compliment but you are so saucy, I wont blot it out. Depend upon it, We know better than to repeal our Masculine systems. Altho they are in full Force, you know they are little more than Theory. We dare not exert our Power in its full Latitude. We are obliged to go fair, and softly, and in Practice you know We are the subjects. We have only the Name of Masters, and rather than give up this, which would completely subject Us to the Despotism of the Peticoat, I hope General Washington, and all our brave Heroes would fight. . . . Abigail Adams to Mercy Otis Warren, Braintree April 27, 1776: He is very saucy to me in return for a List of Female Grievances which I transmitted to him I think I will get you to join me in a petition to Congress. I thought it was very probable our wise Statesmen would erect a New Government and form a new code of Laws. I ventured to speak a word on behalf of our Sex, who are rather hardly dealt with by the Laws of England which gives such unlimited power to the Husband to use his wife. I requested that our Legislators would consider our case and as all Men of Delicacy and Sentiment are adverse to Exercising the power they possess, yet as there is a natural

 propensity in Human Nature to domination, I thought the most generous plan was to put it out of the power of the Arbitrary and tyranick to injure us with impunity by Establishing some Laws in favour upon just and Liberal principals. I believe I even threatened fomenting a Rebellion in case we were not considered and assured him we would not hold ourselves bound by any Laws in which we had neither a voice nor representation. In return he tells me he cannot but Laugh at my extraordinary Code of Laws. That he had heard their Struggle had loosened the bands of Government, that children and apprentices were disobedient, that Schools and Colleges had grown turbulent, that Indians slighted their Guardians, and Negroes grew insolent to their Masters. But my Letter was the first intimation that another Tribe more numerous and powerful than all the rest were grown discontented. This is rather too coarse a complement, he adds, but that I am so saucy he wont blot it out. So I have helped the Sex abundantly, but I will tell him I have only been making trial of the Disinterestedness of his Virtue, and when weigh’d in the balance have found it wanting. It would be bad policy to grant us greater power say they since under all the disadvantages we Labour we have the ascendency over their Hearts. And charm by accepting, by submitting sway.

Abigail Adams to John Adams, May 7, 1776:
 I can not say that I think you very generous to the Ladies, for whilst you are proclaiming peace and good will to men, Emancipating all Nations, you insist upon retaining an absolute power over Wives. But you must remember that Arbitrary power is like most other things which are very hard, very liable to be broken and notwithstanding all your wise Laws and Maxims we have it in our power not only to free our selves but to subdue our Masters, and without violence throw both your natural and legal authority at our feet. “Charm by accepting, by submitting sway Yet have our Humour most when we obey.” UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE 1. What was Abigail Adams’s opinion of

 men in power and what did she request of John Adams as they declared ­independence? 2. To what other social developments did John Adams compare his wife’s request? What did he mean by the “Despotism of the Peticoat” (a women’s undergarment)? 3. What did Abigail Adams predict in her second letter to John Adams? What do you think of her assessment of “Arbitrary power”?

 Source: The Adams Family Correspondence, eds. L. H. Butterfield et al. (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1963), vol. I, pp. 29–31.

 The emphasis on liberty and the “rights of man” led some women to begin to question their own position in society. Abigail Adams wrote to her husband, John Adams, in 1776, “In the new code of laws which I suppose it will be necessary for you to make, I desire you would remember the ladies and be more generous and favorable to them than your ancestors.” (See “Consider the Source: The Correspondence of Abigail Adams on Women’s Rights.”) Adams was simply calling for new protections against abusive and tyrannical men. A few women, however, went further. Judith Sargent Murray, one of the leading essayists of the late eighteenth century, wrote in 1779 that women’s minds were as good as those of men and that girls as well as boys therefore deserved access to education. But little changed as a result. Under English common law, an unmarried woman had some legal rights, but a married woman had virtually no rights at all. Everything she • 123

124 • CHAPTER 5


 owned and everything she earned belonged to her husband. Because she had no property rights, she could not engage in any legal transactions on her own. She could not vote. Few Legal Rights for Women She had no legal authority over her children. Nor could she initiate a divorce; that, too, was a right reserved almost exclusively for men. After the Revolution, it did become easier for women to obtain divorces in a few states. Otherwise, there were few advances and some setbacks—including the loss of widows’ rights to regain their dowries from their husbands’ estates. The Revolution, in other words, did not really challenge, but actually confirmed and strengthened, the patriarchal legal system. Still, the Revolution did encourage people of both sexes to reevaluate the contribution of women to the family and society. As the new republic searched for a cultural identity for itself, it attributed a higher value to the role of women as mothers. The new nation was, many Americans liked to believe, producing a new kind of citizen, steeped in the principles of liberty. Mothers had a particularly important task, therefore, in instructing their children in the virtues that the republican citizenry now was expected to possess.

The War Economy
 The Revolution also produced important changes in the structure of the American economy. After more than a century of dependence on the British imperial system, American commerce suddenly found itself on its own. English ships no longer protected American vessels. In fact, they tried to drive them from the seas. British imperial ports were closed to American trade. But this disruption in traditional economic patterns strengthened the American economy in the long run. Enterprising merchants in New England and elsewhere began to develop new commercial networks in the Caribbean and South America. By the mid-1780s, American merchants were also developing an important trade with Asia. When English imports to America were cut off, states desperately tried to stimulate domestic manufacturing. No great industrial expansion resulted, but there was a modest increase in production. Trade also increased substantially among the American states.

THE CREATION OF STATE GOVERNMENTS
 At the same time as Americans were struggling to win their independence on the battlefield, they were also struggling to create new institutions of government to replace the British system they had repudiated.

The Assumptions of Republicanism
 If Americans agreed on nothing else, they agreed that their new governments would be republican. To them, republicanism meant a political system in which all power came from the people, rather than from some supreme authority (such as a king). The success of such a government depended on the character of its citizenry. If the population consisted of sturdy, independent property owners imbued with civic virtue, then the republic could survive. If it consisted of a few powerful aristocrats and a great mass of dependent workers, then it would be in danger. From the beginning, therefore, the ideal of the small freeholder (the independent landowner) was basic to American political ideology. Jefferson, the great champion of the independent yeoman farmer, once wrote: “Dependence begets subservience and venality, suffocates the germ of virtue, and prepares fit tools for the designs of ambition.”

THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION
• 125 

 Another crucial part of that ideology was the concept of equality. The Declaration of Independence had given voice to the idea in its most ringing phrase: “All men are created equal.” The innate talents and energies of individuals, not their positions Rhetoric of Equality at birth, would determine their roles in society. Some people would inevitably be wealthier and more powerful than others. But all people would have to earn their success. There might be no equality of condition, but there would be equality of opportunity. In reality, of course, the United States was never a nation in which all citizens were independent property holders. From the beginning, there was a sizable dependent labor force, white and black. American women remained both politically and economically subordinate. Native Americans were systematically exploited and displaced. Nor was there ever full equality of opportunity. American society was more open and more fluid than that of most European nations, but the condition of a person’s birth was almost always a crucial determinant of success. Nevertheless, in embracing the assumptions of republicanism, Americans were adopting a powerful—even revolutionary—ideology, and their experiment in statecraft became a model for many other countries.

The First State Constitutions
 Two states—Connecticut and Rhode Island—already had governments that were republican in all but name. They simply deleted references to England and the king from their charters and adopted them as constitutions. The other eleven states, however, produced new documents. The first and perhaps most basic decision was that the constitutions were to be written down, because Americans believed the vagueness of England’s unwritten constitution had produced corruption. The second decision was that the power of the Curbing Executive Power executive, which Americans believed had grown too great in England, must be limited. Pennsylvania eliminated the executive altogether. Most other states inserted provisions limiting the power of governors over appointments, reducing or eliminating their right to veto bills, and preventing them from dismissing the legislature. Most important, every state forbade the governor or any other executive officer from holding a seat in the legislature, thus ensuring that, unlike in England, the executive and legislative branches of government would remain separate. Even so, most new constitutions did not embrace direct popular rule. In Georgia and Pennsylvania, the legislature consisted of one popularly elected house. But in every other state, there were upper and lower chambers, and in most cases the upper chamber was designed to represent the “higher orders” of society. There were property requirements for voters—some modest, others substantial—in all states.

Revising State Governments
 By the late 1770s, Americans were growing concerned about the apparent instability of their new state governments. Many believed the problem was one of too much democracy. As a result, most of the states began to revise their constitutions to limit popular power. By waiting until 1780 to ratify its first constitution, Massachusetts became the first state to act on the new concerns. Two changes in particular differentiated the Massachusetts and later constitutions from the earlier ones. The first was a change in the process of c­ onstitution Massachusetts’s Constitution

126 • CHAPTER 5


 writing itself. Most of the first documents had been written by state legislatures and thus could easily be amended (or violated) by them. Massachusetts created the constitutional convention: a special assembly of the people that would meet only for the purpose of writing the constitution. The second change was a significant strengthening of the executive. The 1780 Massachusetts constitution made the governor one of the strongest in any state. He was to be elected directly by the people; he was to have a fixed salary (in other words, he would not be dependent on the legislature each year for his wages); he would have significant appointment powers and a veto over legislation. Other states followed. Those with weak or nonexistent upper houses strengthened or created them. Most increased the powers of the governor. Pennsylvania, which had no executive at all at first, now produced a strong one. By the late 1780s, almost every state had either revised its constitution or drawn up an entirely new one in an effort to produce greater stability in government.

Toleration and Slavery
 Most Americans continued to believe that religion should play some role in government, but they did not wish to give special privileges to any particular denomination. The privileges that churches had once enjoyed were now largely stripped away. In 1786, Virginia enacted the Statute of Religious Liberty, written by Statute of Religious Liberty Thomas Jefferson, which called for the complete separation of church and state. More difficult to resolve was the question of slavery. In areas where slavery was already weak—New England and Pennsylvania—it was gradually abolished. Even in the South, there were some pressures to amend or even eliminate the institution; every state but South Carolina and Georgia prohibited further importation of slaves from abroad, and South Carolina banned the slave trade during the war. Virginia passed a law encouraging the voluntary freeing of slaves. Nevertheless, slavery survived in all of the upper and lower states. There were several reasons: racist assumptions among whites about the inferiority of blacks; the enormous economic investments many white southerners had in their slaves; and the inability of even such men as Washington and Jefferson, who had moral misgivings about slavery, to Reasons for Slavery’s Persistence envision any alternative to it. If slavery was abolished, what would happen to the black people in America? Few whites believed that black men and women could be integrated into American society as equals.

THE SEARCH FOR A NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
 Americans were much quicker to agree on state institutions than they were on the structure of their national government. At first, most believed that the central government should remain relatively weak and that each state would be virtually a sovereign nation. It was in response to such ideas that the Articles of Confederation emerged.

The Confederation
 The Articles of Confederation, which the Continental Congress had adopted in 1777, provided for a national government much like the one already in place before indepenLimited Power of the National Government dence. Congress remained the central—indeed the only—institution of national authority. Its powers expanded to give it authority to conduct

THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION
• 127 

 wars and foreign relations and to appropriate, borrow, and issue money. But it did not have power to regulate trade, draft troops, or levy taxes directly on the people. For troops and taxes, it had to make formal requests to the state legislatures, which could—and often did—refuse them. There was no separate executive; the “president of the United States” was merely the presiding officer at the sessions of Congress. Each state had a single vote in Congress, and at least nine of the states had to approve any important measure. All thirteen state legislatures had to approve any amendment of the Articles. During the process of ratifying the Articles of Confederation (which required approval by all thirteen states), broad disagreements over the plan became evident. The small states had insisted on equal state representation, but the larger states wanted representation to be based on population. The smaller states prevailed on that issue. More important, the states claiming western lands wished to keep them, but the rest of the states demanded that all such territory be turned over to the national government. New York and Virginia had to give up their western claims before the Articles were finally approved. They went into effect in 1781. The Confederation, which existed from 1781 until 1789, was not a complete failure, but it was far from a success. It lacked adequate powers to deal with interstate issues or to enforce its will on the states.

Diplomatic Failures
 In the peace treaty of 1783, the British had promised to evacuate American territory; but British forces continued to occupy a string of frontier posts along the Great Lakes within the United States. Nor did the British honor their agreement to make restitution to slave­ owners whose slaves the British army had confiscated. Disputes also erupted over the northeastern boundary of the new nation and over the border between the United States and Florida. Most American trade remained within the British Empire, and Americans wanted full access to British markets; England, however, placed sharp restrictions on that access. In 1784, Congress sent John Adams as minister to London to resolve these differences, but Adams made no headway with the English, who were John Adams, Ambassador to England never sure whether he represented a single nation or thirteen different ones. Throughout the 1780s, the British government refused even to send a diplomatic minister to the American capital. Confederation diplomats agreed to a treaty with Spain in 1786. The Spanish accepted the American interpretation of the Florida boundary. In return, the Americans recognized the Spanish possessions in North America and accepted limits on the right of United States vessels to navigate the Mississippi for twenty years. But southern states, incensed at the idea of giving up their access to the Mississippi, blocked ratification.

The Confederation and the Northwest
 The Confederation’s most important accomplishment was its resolution of controversies involving the western lands. The Confederation had to find a way to include these areas in the political structure of the new nation. The Ordinance of 1784, based on a proposal by Thomas Jefferson, divided the western territory into ten self-governing districts, each of which could Ordinances of 1784 and 1785 petition Congress for statehood when its population equaled the number of free inhabitants of the smallest existing state. Then, in the Ordinance of 1785, Congress created a system for surveying and selling the western lands. The territory north of the Ohio River was to

128 • CHAPTER 5
The Seven Ranges—First Area Surveyed


 rie

 eE

 1st Range

Lak


PA.


 ng um

R.


 ki us eM l t t Li

O


 o hi

OHIO
(1803)
INDIANA


Cincinnati


C
D


E


VIRGINIA


KENTUCKY
(1792)


 *Four sections reserved for subsequent sales

 r ve Ri

A
B


PENNSYLVANIA


VIRGINIA


NORTHWEST TERRITORY














 Section 16 reserved for school funds



29* 23




11*




 One Section = 640 acres (1 mile square) A Half section = 320 acres B Quarter section = 160 acres C Half-quarter section = 80 acres D & E Quarter-quarter section = 40 acres



























26* 20




8*
















 One township (6 miles square)

 6 miles

 2nd Range

 3rd Range

 4th Range

 5th Range

 6th Range

 7th Range

GEOGRAPHER’S LINE (BASE LINE)


 1 mile LAND SURVEY: ORDINANCE OF 1785 In the Ordinance of 1785, the Congress established a new system for surveying and selling western lands. These maps illustrate the way in which the lands were divided in an area of Ohio. Note the highly geometrical grid pattern that the ordinance imposed on these lands. Each of the squares in the map on the left was subdivided into 36 sections, as illustrated in the map at the lower right. • Why was this grid pattern so appealing to the planners of the western lands?

 be surveyed and marked off into neat rectangular townships, each divided into thirty-six identical sections. In every township, four sections were to be reserved by the federal government for future use or sale (a policy that helped establish the idea of “public land”). The revenue from the sale of one of these federally reserved sections was to support creation of a public school. The precise rectangular pattern imposed on the Northwest Territory—the grid—became a model for all subsequent land policies of the federal government and for many other planning decisions in states and localities. The grid also became characteristic of the layout of many American cities. It had many advantages. It eliminated the uncertainty about property borders that earlier, more informal land systems had produced. It sped the development of western lands by making land ownership simple and understandable. But it also encouraged a dispersed form of settlement—with each farm family separated from its neighbors—that made the formation of community more difficult. Whatever its consequences, however, the 1785 Ordinance made a dramatic and indelible mark on the American landscape.

THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION
• 129 

 The original ordinances proved highly favorable to land speculators and less so to ordinary settlers, many of whom could not afford the price of the land. Congress compounded the problem by selling much of the best land to the Ohio and Scioto Companies before making it available to anyone else. Criticism of these policies led to the passage in 1787 of another law governing western settlement—legislation that became known as the “Northwest Ordinance.” The 1787 Ordinance abandoned the ten The Northwest Ordinance ­districts established in 1784 and created a single Northwest Territory out of the lands north of the Ohio; the territory could be divided subsequently into three to five territories. It also specified a population of 60,000 as a minimum for statehood, guaranteed freedom of religion and the right to trial by jury to residents of the region, and prohibited slavery throughout the territory. The western lands south of the Ohio River received less attention from Congress. The region that became Kentucky and Tennessee developed rapidly in the late 1770s as slave­ owning territories, and in the 1780s began setting up governments and asking for statehood. The Confederation Congress was never able to resolve the conflicting claims in that region successfully.

Indians and the Western Lands
 On paper, the western land policies of the Confederation brought order and stability to the process of white settlement in the Northwest. But in reality, order and stability came slowly and at great cost because much of the land was claimed by the Indians. Congress tried to resolve that problem in 1784, 1785, and 1786 by persuading Iroquois, Choctaw, Chickasaw, and Cherokee leaders to sign treaties ceding lands to the United States. But those agreements proved ineffective. In 1786, the leadership of the Iroquois Confederacy repudiated the treaty it had signed two years earlier. Other tribes had never really accepted the treaties affecting them and continued to resist white movement into their lands. Violence between whites and Indians on the Northwest frontier reached a crescendo in the early 1790s. In 1790 and again in 1791, the Miami, led by the famed warrior Little Turtle, defeated United States forces in two major battles. Efforts to negotiate a settlement failed because of the Miami’s insistence that no treaty was possible unless it forbade white settlement west of the Ohio River. Negotiations did not resume until after General Anthony Wayne led 4,000 soldiers into the Ohio Valley in 1794 and defeated Battle of Fallen Timbers the Indians in the Battle of Fallen Timbers. A year later, the Miami signed the Treaty of Greenville, ceding substantial new lands to the United States in exchange for a formal acknowledgment of their claim to the territory they had managed to retain. This was the first time the new federal government recognized the sovereignty of Indian nations; in doing so, it affirmed that Indian lands could be ceded only by the tribes themselves. That hard-won assurance, however, proved a frail protection against the pressure of white expansion.

Debts, Taxes, and Daniel Shays
 The postwar depression, which lasted from 1784 to 1787, increased the perennial American problem of an inadequate money supply, a burden that weighed particularly heavily on debtors. The Confederation itself had an enormous outstanding debt, accumulated during the Revolutionary War, and few means with which to pay it down. It had sold war bonds that were now due to be repaid; it owed money to its soldiers; it had substantial debts

130 • CHAPTER 5


 abroad. But with no power to tax, it could request money only from the states, and it received only about one-sixth of the money it asked for. The fragile new nation was faced with the grim prospect of defaulting on its obligations. This alarming possibility brought to prominence a group of leaders who would play a crucial role in the shaping of the republic for several decades. Robert Morris, the head of the Confederation’s treasury; Alexander Hamilton, his young protégé; James Madison of Virginia; and others—all called for a “continental impost,” a 5 percent duty on imported goods to be levied by Congress and used to fund the debt. Many Americans, however, feared that the impost plan would concentrate too much financial power in the hands of Morris and his allies in Philadelphia. Congress failed to approve the impost in 1781 and again in 1783. The states had war debts, too, and they generally relied on increased taxation to pay them. But poor farmers, already burdened by debt, considered such policies unfair. They demanded that the state governments issue paper currency to increase the money supply and make it easier for them to meet their obligations. Resentment was especially high among farmers in New England, who felt that the states were squeezing them to enrich already wealthy bondholders in Boston and other towns. Throughout the late 1780s, therefore, mobs of distressed farmers rioted periodically in various parts of New England. Dissidents in the Connecticut Valley and the Berkshire Hills of Massachusetts rallied behind Daniel Shays, a former captain in the Continental army. Shays issued a set of demands that included paper money, tax relief, a moratorium on debts, and the abolition of imprisonment for debt. During the summer of 1786, the Shaysites prevented the collection of debts, private or public, and used force to keep courts from convening and sheriffs from selling confiscated property. When winter came, the rebels advanced on Springfield, hoping to seize weapons from the arsenal there. In January Shays’s Rebellion 1787, an army of state militiamen set out from Boston, met Shays’s band, and dispersed his ragged troops.

DANIEL SHAYS AND JOB SHATTUCK
Shays and Shattuck were the principal leaders of the 1786 uprising of poor Massachusetts farmers demanding relief from their indebtedness. Shattuck led an insurrection in the east, which collapsed when he was captured on November 30. Shays organized the rebellion in the west, which continued until it was finally dispersed by state militia in late February 1787. The following year, state authorities pardoned Shays; even before that, the legislature responded to the rebellion by providing some relief to the impoverished farmers. This drawing is part of a hostile account of the rebellion published in 1787 in a Boston almanac. (© Granger, NYC—All Rights Reserved.) 
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION
• 131 

 As a military enterprise, Shays’s Rebellion was a failure, although it did produce some concessions to the aggrieved farmers. Shays and his lieutenants, at first sentenced to death, were later pardoned, and Massachusetts offered the protesters some tax relief and a postponement of debt payments. But the rebellion had important consequences for the future of the United States, for it added urgency to the movement to produce a new, national constitution.

CONCLUSION
 Between a small, inconclusive battle on a village green in New England in 1775 and a momentous surrender at Yorktown in 1781, the American people fought a great and terrible war against the mightiest military nation in the world. Few would have predicted in 1775 that the makeshift armies of the colonies could withstand the armies and navies of the British Empire. But a combination of luck, brilliance, determination, costly errors by the British, and timely aid from abroad allowed the Patriots, as they began to call themselves, to make full use of the advantages of fighting on their home soil and to frustrate British designs. The war was not just a historic military event. It was also a great political one, for it propelled the colonies to unite, to organize, and to declare their independence. Having done so, they fought with even greater determination, defending now not just a set of principles, but an actual, fledgling nation. By the end of the war, they had created new governments at both the state and national level and had begun experimenting with new political forms. The war was also important for its effects on American society—for the way it shook the existing social order; for the way it caused women to question their place in society; and for the way it spread notions of liberty and freedom throughout a society that in the past had mostly been rigidly hierarchical. Even African American slaves absorbed some of the ideas of the Revolution, although it would be many years before they would be in any position to make much use of them. Victory in the American Revolution solved many of the problems of the new nation, but it also produced others. What should the United States do about its relations with the Indians and with its neighbors to the north and south? What should it do about the distribution of western lands? What should it do about slavery? How should it balance its commitment to liberty with its need for order? These questions bedeviled the new national government in its first years of existence.

KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
Abigail Adams 123
American Patriots 121
Articles of
Confederation 110
Battle of Fallen Timbers 129
Benedict Arnold 118
Common Sense 107
Declaration of
Independence 110


George Washington 111
Hessians 107
John Burgoyne 114
Joseph and Mary
Brant 114
Lord Cornwallis 118
Loyalists (Tories) 119
Northwest Ordinance 129
 republicanism 124

Saratoga 114
Second Continental
Congress 107
 Shays’s Rebellion 130 Thomas Jefferson 110 William Howe 113 Yorktown 118

132 • CHAPTER 5


RECALL AND REFLECT
 1. What questions did the Second Continental Congress debate, and how did it answer

 them? 2. What was the impact of Thomas Paine’s Common Sense on Americans’ view of the war

 with Britain? 3. What were the ideological ideals of the new state and national governments, and how

 did those ideals compare with the realities of American society? 4. What was the purpose of the Articles of Confederation? 5. How did the Revolution affect the role of religion and the position of churches in

 American society?



THE
CONSTITUTION
AND THE NEW
REPUBLIC
FRAMING A NEW GOVERNMENT
ADOPTION AND ADAPTATION
FEDERALISTS AND REPUBLICANS
ESTABLISHING NATIONAL SOVEREIGNTY
THE DOWNFALL OF THE FEDERALISTS


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. What were the most important questions debated at the Constitutional Convention of 1787, and how were they resolved? 2. What were the main tenets of the Federalist and Antifederalist arguments on ratification of the Constitution? 3. What were the origins of America’s “first party system”?

BY THE LATE 1780S, MANY
Americans had grown dissatisfied with the Confeder­ ation. It was, they believed, ridden with factions, unable to deal effectively with economic prob­ lems, and frighteningly powerless in the face of Shays’s Rebellion. A decade earlier, Americans had deliberately avoided creating a strong national government. Now they reconsidered. In 1787, the nation produced a new constitution and a much more powerful government with three independent branches. But the adoption of the Constitution did not complete the ­creation of the republic, for although most Americans came to agree that the Constitution was a nearly perfect document, they often disagreed on what that document meant. 
• 133


FRAMING A NEW
GOVERNMENT


TIME LINE
Annapolis Conference
Constitutional
Convention;
 Constitution adopted 1787–1788 States ratify Constitution Washington becomes first president Bill of Rights

 The Confederation Congress had become so unpopular and ineffectual by the mid-1780s that it began to lead an almost waiflike existence. In 1783, its members timidly withdrew from Philadelphia to escape army veterans demanding their back pay. They took refuge for a while in Princeton, New Jersey, then moved on to Annapolis, Maryland, and in 1785 settled in New York. Delegates were often scarce. Only with great difficulty could Congress produce a quorum to ratify the treaty with Great Britain, ending the Revolutionary War.

French Revolution
Judiciary Act
First Bank of U.S.
 chartered Washington reelected Whiskey Rebellion Jay’s Treaty Pinckney’s Treaty John Adams elected president

XYZ
Affair Alien and Sedition Acts 
1798–1799
 Quasi war with France Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions Jefferson elected president

134 •


Advocates of Reform
 In the 1780s, some of the wealthiest and most powerful groups in the population began to clamor for a stronger national government. By 1786, such demands had grown so intense that even defenders of the existing system reluctantly agreed that the government needed strengthening at its weakest point—its lack of power to tax. The most effective advocate of a stronger national government was Alexander Hamilton, the illegitimate son of a Scottish merchant in the West Indies, who had become a successful New York lawyer. Hamilton now called for a national convention to overhaul the Articles of Confederation. He found an important ally in James Madison of Virginia, who persuaded the Virginia legislature to convene an interstate conference on commercial questions. Only five states sent delegates to the meeting, which took place at Annapolis in 1786; but the conference approved a proposal by Hamilton for a convention of special delegates from all the states to meet in Philadelphia the next year. At first there seemed little reason to believe the Philadelphia convention would attract any more delegates than had the Annapolis meeting. Then, early in 1787, the

THE CONSTITUTION AND THE NEW REPUBLIC
• 135 

 news of Shays’s Rebellion spread throughout the nation, alarming many previously ­apathetic leaders, including George Washington, who promptly made plans to travel to Philadelphia for the Constitutional Convention. Washington’s support gave the meeting wide credibility.

A
Divided Convention  Fifty-five men, representing all the states except Rhode Island, attended one or more ­sessions of the convention that sat in the Philadelphia State House from May to September 1787. These “Founding Fathers,” as they became known much later, The “Founding Fathers” were relatively young (the average age was forty-four) and well educated by the standards of their time. Most were wealthy property owners, and many feared what one of them called the “turbulence and follies” of democracy. Yet all retained the Revolutionary ­suspicion of concentrated power. The convention unanimously chose Washington to preside over its sessions and then closed it to the public and the press. It then ruled that each state delegation would have a single vote and that major decisions would require not unanimity, as they did in Congress, but a simple majority. Almost all the delegates agreed that the United States needed a stronger central government. But there agreement ended. Virginia, the most populous state, sent a well-prepared delegation to Philadelphia led by James Madison (thirty-six years old), who had devised in some detail a plan for a new “national” government. The Virginia Plan shaped the agenda of the Madison’s Virginia Plan convention from the moment Edmund Randolph of Virginia opened the debate by proposing that “a national government ought to be established, consisting of a supreme Legislative, Executive, and Judiciary.” Even that brief description outlined a government very different from the Confederation. But the delegates were so committed to fundamental reform that they approved the resolution after only brief debate. There was less agreement about the details of Madison’s Virginia Plan. It called for a national legislature of two houses. In the lower house, states would be represented in proportion to their population. Members of the upper house were to be elected by the lower house under no rigid system of representation; thus some of the smaller states might at times have no members at all in the upper house. The proposal aroused immediate opposition among delegates from the smaller states. William Paterson of New Jersey offered an alternative (the New Paterson’s New Jersey Plan Jersey Plan) that would retain the essence of the Confederacy with its one-house legislature in which all states had equal representation. It would, however, give Congress expanded powers to tax and to regulate commerce. The convention rejected Paterson’s proposal, but supporters of the Virginia Plan now realized they would have to make concessions to the smaller states. They agreed to permit members of the upper house (what became the Senate) to be elected by the state legislatures. Many questions remained unresolved. Among the most important was the question of slavery. There was no serious discussion of abolishing slavery during the convention. But other issues were debated heatedly. Would slaves be counted as part of the population in determining representation in Congress? Or would they be considered property, not entitled to ­representation? Delegates from the states with large slave populations wanted to have it both ways. They argued that slaves should be considered persons in determining representation but as property if the new government levied taxes on the states on the basis of population. Representatives from states where slavery had disappeared or was expected soon to disappear argued that slaves should be included in calculating taxation but not representation.

