590 • CHAPTER 24


 and dairy products) would impose production limits on their crops. The government, through the Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA), would then tell individual Agricultural Adjustment Administration farmers how much they should produce and would pay them subsidies for leaving some of their land idle. A tax on food processing (for example, the milling of wheat) would provide the funds for the new payments. Farm prices were to be subsidized up to the point of parity. The AAA helped bring about a rise in prices for farm commodities in the years after 1933. Gross farm income increased by half in the first three years of the New Deal, and the agricultural economy as a whole emerged from the 1930s more stable and prosperous than it had been in many years. The AAA did, however, favor larger farmers over smaller ones. By distributing payments to landowners, not those who worked the land, the government allowed planters to reduce their acreage, evict tenants and sharecroppers, and fire field hands. In January 1936, the Supreme Court struck down the crucial provisions of the AAA, arguing that the government had no constitutional authority to require farmers to limit production. But within a few weeks, the administration had secured passage of new legislation (the Soil Conservation and Domestic Allotment Act), which permitted the government to pay farmers to reduce production so as to “conserve soil,” prevent erosion, and accomplish other secondary goals. The administration launched several efforts to assist poor farmers as well. The Resettlement Administration, established in 1935, and its successor, the Farm Security Farm Security Administration Administration, created in 1937, provided loans to help farmers cultivating submarginal soil to relocate to better lands. But the programs moved no more than a few thousand farmers. More effective was the Rural Electrification Administration, created in 1935, which worked to make electric power available for the first time to thousands of farmers through utility cooperatives.

Industrial Recovery
 Since 1931, leaders of the United States Chamber of Commerce and many others had been urging the government to adopt an antideflation program that would permit trade associations to cooperate in stabilizing prices within their industries. Existing antitrust laws clearly forbade such practices, and Herbert Hoover had refused to endorse suspension of the laws. The Roosevelt administration was more receptive. In exchange for relaxing antitrust provisions, however, New Dealers insisted on other provisions. Business leaders would have to recognize the workers’ right to bargain collectively through unions and to ensure that the incomes of workers would rise along with prices. And to help create jobs and increase consumer buying power, the administration added a major program of public works spending. The result of these and many other impulses was the National Industrial Recovery Act, which Congress passed in June 1933. At its center was a new federal agency, the National Recovery Administration (NRA), National Recovery Administration under the direction of the flamboyant and energetic Hugh S. Johnson. Johnson called on every business establishment in the nation to accept a t­ emporary “blanket code”: a m ­ inimum wage of between 30 and 40 cents an hour, a maximum workweek of thirty-five to forty hours, and the abolition of child labor. At the same time, Johnson negotiated another, more specific set of codes with leaders of the nation’s major industries. These industrial codes set floors below which no company would lower prices

THE NEW DEAL
• 591 

 or wages in its search for a competitive advantage, and they included provisions for maintaining employment and production. He quickly won agreements from almost every major industry in the country. From the beginning, however, the NRA stumbled. The codes themselves were hastily and often poorly written. Large producers consistently dominated the Problems of the NRA code-writing process and ensured that the new regulations would work to their advantage and to the disadvantage of smaller firms. And the codes at times did more than simply set floors under prices; they actively and artificially raised them—sometimes to levels higher than the market could sustain. Other NRA goals also worked against recovery. Section 7(a) of the National Industrial Recovery Act promised workers the right to form unions and engage in collective bargaining and encouraged many workers to join unions for the first time. But Section 7(a) contained no enforcement mechanisms. The Public Works Administration (PWA), established to administer the National Industrial Recovery Act’s spending programs, only gradually allowed the $3.3 billion in public works funds to trickle out. Perhaps the clearest evidence of the NRA’s failure was that industrial production actually declined in the months after the agency’s establishment, despite the rise in prices that the codes had helped create. The NRA failed to increase the buying power for consumers, which made the higher prices an obstacle to growth. By the spring of 1934, the NRA was besieged by criticism. That fall, Roosevelt pressured Johnson to resign and established a new board of directors to oversee the NRA. Then in 1935, the Supreme Court intervened with a case involving alleged NRA code violations by the Schechter brothers, who operated a wholesale poultry business confined to Brooklyn, New York. The Court ruled unanimously that the Schechters were not engaged in interstate commerce (and thus not subject to federal regulation) and, further, that Congress had unconstitutionally delegated legislative power to the president to draft the NRA codes. The justices struck down the legislation establishing the agency. Roosevelt denounced the justices for their “horse-and-buggy” interpretation of the interstate commerce clause. He was rightly concerned, for the reasoning in the Schechter case threatened many other New Deal programs as well. But many New Dealers—and many others—­ welcomed the NRA’s demise.

Regional Planning
 The AAA and the NRA largely reflected the beliefs of New Dealers who favored economic planning but wanted private interests (farmers or business leaders) to dominate the planning process. But other reformers believed that the government itself should be the chief planning agent in the economy. Their most conspicuous Tennessee Valley Authority ­success was an unprecedented experiment in regional planning: the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA). Progressive reformers had agitated for years for public development of the nation’s water resources as a source of cheap electric power. In particular, they had urged completion of a great dam at Muscle Shoals on the Tennessee River in Alabama—a dam begun during World War I but left unfinished when the war ended. But opposition from the utilities companies had blocked further progress on the dam. In 1932, however, one of the great utility empires—that of the electricity magnate Samuel Insull—collapsed spectacularly amid widely publicized exposés of corruption. Hostility to the

592 • CHAPTER 24
W. VIRGINIA


ILLINOIS
Oh
 io

R.


KENTU CKY


Paducah
Bowling
Green


Wolf Greek


M


T


S.


 h inc Cl

LA


N


D


Dale Hollow


BE


M


Nashville


Tennessee R
.


.


TENNESSEE


Columbia


Chattanooga
 Hale’s Bar

Decatur


A
 Watt’s Bar

PP


AL


I
CH


A
Knoxville 

NT


A


S
IN


Cherokee
Douglas


Fort Loudoun


E
GR


AT


SM


O


Guntersville


ALABAMA




Chatuge


50 mi


NORTH
CAROLINA


Santeetlah
Nantahala


Hiwassee


G EOR G IA


R.


Watauga


Asheville


Cheoah
Calderwood Fontana


 t on

South Holston
Johnson
City
.
TS
M
Y
K


Glenville


SOUTH
CAROLINA


Blue Ridge


R.


Huntsville


Oak
Ridge


AN


OU


 ls Ho

 ss ee

Wheeler


Muscle
Shoals


Te
 nn e

Wilson


Norris


Apalachia
Chickamauga
Ocoee


Elk R.


Pickwick
Landing


MISSISSIPPI


CU


Center Hill
Duck R


M


R


 berland R. Cum

VIRGINIA


R.


100 km


Tennessee River
 watershed

 Power plant

 TVA dam project

 Chemical plant

 The Tennessee Valley Authority was one of the largest experiments in government-funded public works and regional planning in American history to that point. The federal government had helped fund many projects in its history—canals, turnpikes, railroads, bridges, dams, and others. But never before had it undertaken a project of such great scope, and never before had it maintained such close control and ownership over the public works it helped create. This map illustrates the broad reach of the TVA within the Tennessee Valley region, which spanned seven states. TVA dams throughout the region helped control floods and also provided a source of hydroelectric power, which the government sold to consumers. Note the dam near Muscle Shoals, Alabama, in the bottom left of the map. It was begun during World War I, and efforts to revive it in the 1920s helped create the momentum that produced the TVA. • Why were progressives so eager to see the government enter the business of hydroelectric power in the 1920s? THE TENNESSEE VALLEY AUTHORITY

 utilities soon grew so intense that the companies were no longer able to block the public power movement. The result was legislation, supported by the president and enacted by Congress in May 1933, creating the Tennessee Valley Authority. The TVA was authorized to complete the dam at Muscle Shoals and build other dams in the region, and to generate and sell electricity from them to the public at reasonable rates. It was also intended to promote a comprehensive redevelopment of the entire region, encouraging the growth of local industries, supervising a substantial program of reforestation, and helping farmers improve productivity. Opposition by conservatives ultimately blocked many of the ambitious social planning projects proposed by the more visionary TVA administrators, but the Authority revitalized the region in numerous ways. It improved water transportation, virtually eliminated flooding in the region, and provided electricity to thousands who had never before had it. Throughout the country, largely because of the “yardstick” provided by the TVA’s cheap production of electricity, private power rates declined. Even so, the Tennessee Valley remained a generally impoverished region despite the TVA’s efforts.

The Growth of Federal Relief
 The Roosevelt administration did not consider relief to the unemployed its most important task, but it recognized the necessity of doing something to help impoverished Americans survive until the government could revive the economy to the point where

THE NEW DEAL
• 593 

 relief might not be necessary. Among Roosevelt’s first acts as president was the establishment of the Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA), which provided cash grants to states to prop up bankrupt relief agencies. To administer the program, he chose the director of the New York State relief agency, Harry Hopkins. Both Hopkins and Roosevelt had misgivings about establishing a government “dole,” but they felt somewhat more comfortable with another form of government assistance: work relief. Thus when it became clear that the FERA grants were not enough, the administration established a second program: the Civil Works Administration (CWA), which put more than 4 million people to work on temporary projects between November 1933 and April 1934. Some of the projects were of lasting value, such as the construction of roads, schools, and parks; others were little more than make-work. To Hopkins, however, the important things were pumping money into the economy and providing assistance to people with nowhere else to turn. Roosevelt’s favorite relief project was the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC). The CCC created camps in national parks and forests and in other rural Civilian Conservation Corps and wilderness settings. There, young unemployed men from the cities worked in a semimilitary environment on such projects as planting trees, building reservoirs, developing parks, and improving agricultural irrigation. Mortgage relief was a pressing need for millions of farm owners and homeowners. The Farm Credit Administration, which within two years refinanced Mortgage Relief one-fifth of all farm mortgages in the United States, was one response to that problem. The Frazier-Lemke Farm Bankruptcy Act of 1933 was another. It enabled some farmers to regain their land even after the foreclosure of their mortgages. Despite such efforts, however, 25 percent of all American farm owners had lost their land by 1934. Homeowners were similarly troubled, and in June 1933 the administration established the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation, which by 1936 had refinanced the mortgages of more than 1 million householders. A year later, Congress established the Federal Housing Administration to insure mortgages for new construction and home repairs.

THE NEW DEAL IN TRANSITION
 Seldom has an American president enjoyed such remarkable popularity as Franklin Roosevelt did during his first two years in office. But by early 1935, the New Deal faced fierce public criticism. (For reverberations of such praise and condemnation in the historical scholarship on Roosevelt, see “Debating the Past: The New Deal.”) In the spring of 1935, partly in response to these growing attacks, Roosevelt launched an ambitious new program of legislation that has often been called the “Second New Deal.”

The Conservative Criticism of the New Deal
 Despite his great popularity, Franklin Roosevelt had many conservative critics. Some of them detested him so bitterly that they would refuse to say his name—calling him “that man.” Those critics included businessmen, financiers, wealthy families, and members of aristocratic society.

DEBATING THE PAST


The New Deal
Contemporaries of Franklin Roosevelt
 ­debated the impact of the New Deal with ferocious intensity. Conservatives complained of a menacing tyranny of the state. Liberals celebrated the New Deal’s progressive achievements. Some people on the left charged that the reforms of the 1930s were largely cosmetic and ignored the ­nation’s fundamental problems. Although the conservative critique found relatively little scholarly expression until many years after Roosevelt’s death, the liberal and left positions continued for decades to shape the way historians described the Roosevelt ­administration. The dominant view from the beginning was an approving liberal interpretation, and its most important early voice was that of Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. He argued in the three volumes of The Age of Roosevelt (1957– 1960) that the New Deal marked a continuation of the long struggle between public power and private interests, a struggle Roosevelt had moved to a new level. Workers, farmers, consumers, and others now had much more protection than they had enjoyed in the past. At almost the same time, however, other historians were offering more qualified assessments of the New Deal, although they remained securely within the liberal framework. Richard Hofstadter argued in 1955 that the New Deal gave American liberalism a “social-democratic tinge that had never before been present in American reform movements,” but that its highly pragmatic approach lacked a central, guiding philosophy. James MacGregor Burns argued in 1956 that Roosevelt failed to make full use of his potential as a leader. 594 •

 William Leuchtenburg’s Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal (1963) was the first systematic “revisionist” interpretation. Leuchtenburg challenged the views of earlier scholars who had proclaimed the New Deal a “revolution” in social policy. Leuchtenburg could muster only enough enthusiasm to call it a “halfway revolution,” one that helped some previously disadvantaged groups (most notably farmers and workers) but that did little or nothing for many others (African Americans, sharecroppers, the urban poor). Harsher criticisms soon emerged. Barton Bernstein in a 1968 essay concluded that the New Deal had saved capitalism, but at the expense of the least powerful. Ronald Radosh, Paul Conkin, and, later, Thomas Ferguson and Colin Gordon expanded on these criticisms. The New Deal, they contended, was part of the twentieth-century tradition of “corporate liberalism”—a tradition in which reform is closely wedded to the needs and ­interests of capitalism. Most scholars in the 1980s and 1990s, however, seemed largely to have accepted the revised liberal view: that the New Deal was a significant and valuable chapter in the history of reform, but one that worked within rigid, occasionally crippling limits. Much of that work on the New Deal, therefore, focused on the constraints it faced. Some scholars (notably the sociologist Theda Skocpol) emphasized the issue of “state capacity”—the absence of a government bureaucracy with sufficient strength and expertise to shape or administer many programs. James T. Patterson, Barry Karl, Mark Leff, and others stressed the political constraints the New Deal encountered—the

 conservative inhibitions about government that remained strong in Congress and among the public. Frank Freidel, Ellis Hawley, Herbert Stein, and many others pointed as well to the ideological constraints affecting Franklin Roosevelt and his ­supporters—the limits of their own understanding of their time. Alan Brinkley, in The End of Reform (1995), described an ideological shift within New Deal liberalism that marginalized older concerns about wealth and monopoly power and replaced them with consumer-oriented Keynesianism. David Kennedy, in Freedom from Fear (1999), argued, by contrast, that the more aggressively anticapitalist measures of the early New Deal actually hampered recovery. Only when Roosevelt embraced the power of the market did prosperity begin to return. The conservative attacks on the New Deal in the 2000s provided a newly powerful alternative view. A group of conservatives—among

 them Amity Schlaes and Burton Folsom—­ attacked the New Deal as a failure that created a vast bureaucracy and caused the Depression to last longer than it had to. The phrase “New Deal liberalism” has come in the postwar era to seem synonymous with modern ideas of aggressive federal management of the economy, elaborate welfare systems, a powerful ­bureaucracy, and large-scale government spending. But many historians of the New Deal would argue that the modern idea of New Deal liberalism bears only a limited relationship to the ideas that New Dealers themselves embraced.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. How has the scholarly understanding of

 the New Deal changed over time? 2. Did the New Deal save capitalism? If so,

 how and why?

 Roosevelt himself was among the most aristocratic presidents in American history. But he became the enemy of the very world that he came from. He was an alumnus of Harvard University, but the university president barely spoke to him when he went there to give a speech. He was, as many members of the American elite called him, a “traitor to his class.” But even greater hatred came from conservative businessmen and financiers, who correctly accused New Dealers of imposing new regulations on the business and financial worlds. His critics were also infuriated by new taxes imposed by Roosevelt, even though high taxation reached only a few wealthy people. The hatred of Roosevelt from conservatives took many forms. In 1935, a “whispering campaign” emerged from a New Deal effort to regulate the public utility industry. Stories circulated that the president was a drug addict, that he was insane, and that he was surrounded by psychiatrists at all times. Hamilton Fish Jr., a highly conservative member of Congress, said on the floor of the House of Representatives that “whom the gods would destroy, they make first mad.” Not all critics were as virulent in their hatred of the president. Walter Lippmann, a revered columnist, complained that Roosevelt was moving away from the nation’s traditions. “We belong to a generation that has lost its way,” he wrote. “Unable to develop the great truths which it inherited from the emancipators, it has returned to the heresies of absolutism, authority, and the domination of men by men.” He added that the “enormous concentration of power in the hands of appointed officials . . . can lead only to waste, confusion, bureaucratic rigidity, and the loss of personal liberty.” He charged that Roosevelt had become attracted to fascism and communism, instead of protecting the freedom of individuals. • 595

596 • CHAPTER 24


 Lewis Douglas, Roosevelt’s first budget director, resigned in response to the president’s determination to spend deficit funds to help provide relief to the unemployed. Al Smith, the former New York governor and twice the Democratic candidate, also turned against the president—partly because of jealousy, but also because he considered the New Deal much too far to the left. However, for the most part, the New Deal lacked a clear ideology and, instead, experimented in many ways, some that conservatives found offensive. Conservative business leaders were the most committed leaders of the attack on the Liberty League Established New Deal. They formed a new organization called the Liberty League, led by the Du Pont family (owners of the nation’s largest chemical company). Its goal was to arouse public opposition to what its members called the “dictatorial” policies of the New Deal and to what they considered its attacks on free enterprise. It was led by John Jacob Raskob (a former head of the Democratic National Committee, a former director of General Motors, and a trustee of Du Pont), who had abandoned the Democratic Party and joined the League. Within a year of its founding in 1934, there were more than 35,000 members of the League, reaching a peak of 125,000 in 1936. It also recruited college students from 345 institutions, gaining over 10,000 members. Many followers were northeastern industrialists. The League described itself as a “nonpartisan organization founded to defend the Constitution and defend the rights and liberties guaranteed by that Constitution.” Its purpose was to teach the necessity of respect for the rights of persons and property as fundamental to every form of government . . . to teach the duty of government, to encourage and protect individual and group initiative and enterprise, to foster the right to work, earn, save and acquire property, and to preserve the ownership and lawful use of property when acquired.

 The Liberty League attracted considerable attention, but it had relatively little impact on the New Deal. Its leaders tried to remain nonpartisan, even though its members were staunchly anti-Roosevelt. They became a target for the president’s 1936 reelection campaign. Soon after Roosevelt’s landslide victory, the League dissolved. Hatred of Roosevelt did not disappear, but there was little organized opposition after 1936.

The Populist Criticism of the New Deal
 Roosevelt’s critics on the far left also managed to produce alarm among some supporters of the administration. The Communist Party, the Socialist Party, and other radical and semiradical organizations were at times harshly critical of the New Deal. But like the conservatives, they failed to attract genuine mass support. More menacing to the New Deal than either the far right or the far left was a group of dissident political movements that defied easy ideological classification. Some gained substantial public support within particular states and regions. And three men succeeded in mobilizing genuinely national followings. Dr. Francis E. Townsend, an elderly California physician, rose from obscurity to lead a movement of more than 5 million members with his plan for federal pensions for older adults. According to the Townsend The Townsend Plan Plan, all Americans over the age of sixty would receive monthly government pensions of $200, provided they retired (thus freeing jobs for younger, unemployed Americans) and spent the money in full each month (which would pump needed funds into the economy). By 1935, the Townsend Plan had attracted the support of many older men and women.

THE NEW DEAL
• 597 

 Few public speakers could arouse a crowd more effectively than Huey Long of Louisiana, known to many as “the Kingfish” (a nickname borrowed from a scheming character on the popular radio show Amos ‘n’ Andy). It was Long’s effective use of radio, however, that contributed most directly to his spreading national popularity in the early 1930s. (© Archive Photos/Getty Images) HUEY LONG

 Father Charles E. Coughlin, a Catholic priest in the Detroit suburb of Royal Oak, Michigan, achieved even greater renown through his weekly nationally Father Charles Coughlin broadcast radio sermons. He proposed a series of monetary reforms—remonetization of silver, issuing of greenbacks, and nationalization of the banking system—that he insisted would restore prosperity and ensure economic justice. At first a warm supporter of Roosevelt, Coughlin had become disheartened by late 1934 by what he claimed was the president’s failure to deal harshly enough with the “money powers.” In the spring of 1935, he established his own political organization, the National Union for Social Justice. Most alarming to the administration was the growing national popularity of Senator Huey P. Long of Louisiana. Long had risen to power in his home state through his Huey Long strident attacks on the banks, oil companies, and utilities and on the conservative political oligarchy allied with them. Elected governor in 1928, he launched an assault on his opponents so thorough and forceful that they were soon left with virtually no political power. But he also maintained the overwhelming support of the Louisiana electorate, in part because of his flamboyant personality and in part because of his solid record of conventional progressive accomplishments: building roads, schools, and hospitals; revising the tax codes; distributing free textbooks; lowering utility rates. Barred by law from succeeding himself as governor, he ran in 1930 for a seat in the United States Senate and won easily.

598 • CHAPTER 24


 Long, like Coughlin, supported Franklin Roosevelt for president in 1932. But within six months of Roosevelt’s inauguration, Long had broken with the president. As an alternative to the New Deal, he advocated a drastic program of wealth redistribution, a program he ultimately named the Share-Our-Wealth Plan. The government, he claimed, could end the Depression easily by using the tax system to confiscate the surplus riches of the wealthiest men and women in America and distribute these surpluses to the rest of the population. That would, he claimed, allow the government to guarantee every family a minimum “homestead” of $5,000 and an annual wage of $2,500. In 1934, Long established his own national organization: the Share-Our-Wealth Society, which soon attracted a large following through much of the nation. A poll by the Democratic National Committee in the spring of 1935 disclosed that Long might attract more than 10 percent of the vote if he ran as a third-party candidate, possibly enough to tip a close election to the Republicans. Members of the Roosevelt administration considered dissident movements—and the broad popular discontent they represented—a genuine threat. An increasing number of advisers were warning Roosevelt that he would have to do something dramatic to counter their strength.

The “Second New Deal”
 Roosevelt launched the so-called Second New Deal in the spring of 1935 in response both to growing political pressures and to the continuing economic crisis. The new proposals represented a shift in the emphasis of New Deal policy. Perhaps the most conspicuous change was in the administration’s attitude toward big business. Symbolically at least, the president was now willing to attack corporate interests openly. In March, for example, he proposed to Congress an act designed to break up the great utility holding companies. The Holding Company Act of 1935 was the result, although furious lobbying by the utilities led to amendments that sharply limited its effects. Equally alarming to affluent Americans was a series of tax reforms proposed by the president in 1935. Apparently designed to undercut the appeal of Huey Long’s Share-OurWealth Plan, the Roosevelt proposals called for establishing the highest and most progressive peacetime tax rates in history—although the actual impact of these rates was limited. The Supreme Court decision in 1935 to strike down the National Industrial Recovery Act also invalidated Section 7(a) of the act, which had guaranteed workers the right to organize and bargain collectively. A group of progressives in Congress, led by Senator Robert E. Wagner of New York, introduced what became the National Labor Relations Act of 1935. The new law, popularly known as the Wagner Act, provided workers with a crucial enforcement mechanism missing from the 1933 law: the National Labor Relations National Labor Relations Board Board (NLRB), which would have power to compel employers to recognize and bargain with legitimate unions. The president was not entirely happy with the bill, but he signed it anyway. That was largely because American workers themselves had by 1935 become so important and vigorous a force that Roosevelt realized his own political future would depend in part on responding to their demands.

Labor Militancy
 The emergence of a powerful trade union movement in the 1930s occurred partly in response to government efforts to enhance the power of unions. It was also a result of the increased militancy of American workers after a lull during the 1920s. Business leaders

THE NEW DEAL
• 599 

 and industrialists lost (at least temporarily) the ability to control government policies. Equally important, new and more powerful labor organizations emerged. The American Federation of Labor (AFL) remained committed to the idea of the craft union: organizing workers on the basis of their skills. But that concept had little to offer unskilled laborers, who now constituted the bulk of the industrial workforce. During the 1930s, therefore, a newer concept of labor organization challenged the craft union ideal: industrial unionism. Advocates of this approach argued that all workers in a particular industry should be organized in a single union, regardless of what functions the workers performed. United in this way, workers would greatly increase their power. Leaders of the AFL craft unions for the most part opposed the new concept. But industrial unionism found a number of important advocates, most prominent among them John L. Lewis, the leader of the United Mine Workers. At first, Lewis John Lewis and the CIO and his allies attempted to work within the AFL, but friction between the new industrial organizations Lewis was promoting and the older craft unions grew rapidly. At the 1935 AFL convention, Lewis became embroiled in a series of angry confrontations with craft union leaders before finally walking out. A few weeks later, he created the Committee on Industrial Organization. When the AFL expelled the new committee and all the industrial unions it represented, Lewis renamed the committee the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) and became its first president. The CIO expanded the constituency of the labor movement. It was more receptive to women and to African Americans than the AFL had been, in part because CIO organizing drives targeted previously unorganized industries (textiles, laundries, tobacco factories, and others) where women and minorities constituted much of the workforce. The CIO was also more militant than the AFL. By the time of the 1936 schism, it was already engaged in major organizing battles in the automobile and steel industries.

Organizing Battles
 The United Auto Workers (UAW) gradually emerged preeminent in the early and mid1930s. But although it was gaining recruits, it was making little progress in winning recognition from the corporations. In December 1936, however, autoworkers employed a controversial and effective new technique for challenging corporate opposition: the ­sit-down strike. Employees in several General Motors plants in Detroit simply sat down inside the plants, refusing either to work or to leave, thus preventing the company from using strikebreakers. The tactic spread to other locations, and by February 1937, strikers had occupied seventeen GM plants. The strikers ignored court orders and local police efforts to force them to vacate the buildings. When Michigan’s governor refused to call up the National Guard to clear out the strikers, and when the federal government also refused to intervene on behalf of employers, General Motors relented. In February 1937, it became the first major manufacturer to recognize the UAW. Other automobile companies soon did the same. In the steel industry, the battle for unionization was less easily won. In 1936, the Steel Workers Organizing Committee (SWOC), later the United Steelworkers of America, began a major organizing drive involving thousands of workers and frequent, at times bitter, strikes. In March 1937, to the surprise of almost everyone, United States Steel, the giant of the industry, recognized the union rather than risk a costly strike. But the smaller companies (known collectively as “Little Steel”) were less accommodating. On Memorial Day 1937, a group of striking workers from Republic Steel gathered with their families

600 • CHAPTER 24


 The bitterness of the labor struggles of the 1930s was nowhere more evident than in Chicago in 1937, when striking workers attempting to march on a Republic Steel plant were brutally attacked by Chicago police, who used clubs, tear gas, and guns to turn away the marchers. Ten strikers were killed and many others were injured. (© Carl Linde/AP Images) THE “MEMORIAL DAY MASSACRE”

 for a picnic and demonstration in south Chicago. When they attempted to march peacefully (and legally) toward the steel plant, police opened fire on them. Ten demonstrators were killed; another ninety were wounded. Despite a public outcry against the “Memorial Day Massacre,” the harsh tactics of Little Steel companies succeeded. The 1937 strike failed. But the victory of Little Steel was among the last gasps of the kind of brutal strikebreaking that had proved so effective in the past. In 1937 alone, there were 4,720 strikes— Rapid Union Growth over 80 percent of them settled in favor of the unions. By the end of the year, more than 8 million workers were members of unions recognized as official bargaining units by employers (as compared with 3 million in 1932). By 1941, that number had expanded to 10 million and included the workers of Little Steel, whose employers had finally recognized the SWOC.

Social Security
 From the first moments of the New Deal, important members of the administration had been lobbying for a system of federally sponsored social insurance for elderly people and those who were unemployed—not just for humanitarian reasons, but also to keep those groups active in the nation’s economy. In 1935, Roosevelt gave public support to what became the Social Security Act, which Congress passed the same year. It established

THE NEW DEAL
• 601 

 several distinct programs. For older people, there were two types of assistance. Those who were presently destitute could receive up to $15 a month in federal assistance. More important for the future, many Americans presently working were incorporated into a pension system, to which they and their employers would contribute through a payroll tax; it would provide them with an income on retirement. Pension payments would provide only $10 to $85 a month to recipients. At first, payment was not to be distributed until 1942. But public pressure pushed the payment date back to 1937. Broad categories of workers (including domestic servants and agricultural laborers) were excluded from the program. But the act was a crucial first step in building the nation’s most important social program for retired Americans. In addition, the Social Security Act created a system of unemployment insurance, which employers alone would finance. It also established a system of federal aid to people with disabilities and a program of aid to dependent children. The framers of the Social Security Act wanted to create a system of “insurance,” not “welfare.” And the largest programs (old-age pensions and unemployment insurance) were in many ways similar to private insurance programs. But the act also provided considerable direct assistance based on need—to low-income aging adults, to those with disabilities, to dependent children and their mothers. These groups were widely perceived to be small and genuinely unable to support themselves. But in later generations, the programs for these groups would expand until they assumed dimensions that the planners of Social Security had not foreseen.

New Directions in Relief
 Social Security was designed primarily to fulfill long-range goals. But millions of unemployed Americans had immediate needs. To help them, the Roosevelt administration established in 1935 the Works Progress Administration (WPA). Like the Civil Works Administration and other earlier efforts, the WPA established a system of work relief for the unemployed. But it was much bigger than the earlier agencies. Under the direction of Harry Hopkins, the WPA was responsible for building or renovating 110,000 public buildings and for constructing almost 600 Harry Hopkins and the WPA airports, more than 500,000 miles of roads, and over 100,000 bridges. In the process, the WPA kept an average of 2.1 million workers employed and pumped needed money into the economy. The WPA also displayed remarkable flexibility and imagination. The Federal Writers’ Project of the WPA, for example, gave unemployed writers a chance to do their work and receive a government salary. The Federal Art Project, similarly, helped painters, sculptors, and others continue their careers. The Federal Music Project and the Federal Theatre Project oversaw the production of concerts and plays, creating work for unemployed musicians, actors, and directors. Other relief agencies emerged alongside the WPA. The National Youth Administration (NYA) provided work and scholarship assistance to men and women of high school and college age. The Emergency Housing Division of the Public Works Administration began federal sponsorship of public housing. The new welfare system dealt with men and women in very different ways. For men, the government concentrated mainly on work relief—on such programs as the CCC, the CWA, and the WPA. The principal government aid to women was not work relief but cash assistance—most notably through the Aid to Dependent Children program of Social Security, which was designed largely to assist single mothers. This disparity in treatment

602 • CHAPTER 24


 The Works Progress Administration funded an enormous variety of work projects to provide jobs for unemployed individuals. The majority of WPA employees, however, worked on construction sites. (© Joseph Schwartz/Corbis) WPA WORKERS ON THE JOB

 reflected a widespread assumption that men should constitute the bulk of the paid workforce. Yet, millions of women were already employed by the 1930s.

The 1936 “Referendum”
 By the middle of 1936—with the economy visibly reviving—there could be little doubt that Roosevelt would win a second term. The Republican Party nominated the moderate governor of Kansas, Alf M. Landon, who waged a relatively dull campaign. Roosevelt’s dissident challengers now appeared powerless. One reason was the assassination of their most effective leader, Huey Long, in Louisiana in September 1935. Another reason was the ill-fated alliance among Father Coughlin, Dr. Townsend, and Gerald L. K. Smith (an intemperate henchman of Huey Long), who joined forces that summer to establish a new political movement—the Union Party, which nominated an undistinguished North Dakota congressman, William Lemke. The result was the greatest landslide in American history to that point. Roosevelt polled just under 61 percent of the vote to Landon’s 36 percent and carried every state except Maine and Vermont. The Democrats increased their already large majorities in both houses of Congress. The election results demonstrated the party realignment that the New Deal had produced. The Democrats now controlled a broad coalition of western and southern farmers, the urban working classes, the poor and unemployed, and white southerners, as well as

THE NEW DEAL
• 603 

 traditional progressives and committed new liberals. New Deal aid flowing to black communities in northern cities helped pry that constituency from the Republican column. The resulting coalition constituted a substantial majority of the electorate. It would be decades before the Republican Party could again create a lasting majority coalition of its own.

THE NEW DEAL IN DISARRAY
 Roosevelt emerged from the 1936 election at the zenith of his popularity. Within months, however, the New Deal was mired in serious new difficulties.

The Court Fight
 The 1936 mandate, Franklin Roosevelt believed, made it possible for him to do something about the Supreme Court. No program of reform, he believed, could long survive the conservative justices, who had already struck down the NRA and the AAA. In February 1937, Roosevelt sent a surprise message to Capitol Hill proposing an overhaul of the federal court system; included among the many provisions was one to add up to six new justices to the Supreme Court. The courts were “overworked,” the president claimed, and needed additional manpower and younger blood to enable them to cope with their increasing burdens. But Roosevelt’s real purpose was to give himself the opportunity to appoint new, liberal justices and change the ideological balance of the Court. (See “Consider the Source: Franklin D. Roosevelt Speaks on the Reorganization of the Judiciary.”) Conservatives were outraged at the “Court-packing plan,” and even many Roosevelt supporters were disturbed by it. Still, Roosevelt might well Reaction to “Court-Packing Plan” have persuaded Congress to approve at least a compromise measure had not the Supreme Court itself intervened. Of the nine justices, three reliably supported the New Deal, and four reliably opposed it. Of the remaining two, Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes often sided with the progressives, and Associate Justice Owen J. Roberts usually voted with the conservatives. On March 29, 1937, Roberts, Hughes, and the three progressive justices voted together to uphold a state minimum-wage law—in the case of West Coast Hotel v. Parrish—thus reversing a 5-to-4 decision of the previous year invalidating a similar law. Two weeks later, again by a 5-to-4 margin, the Court upheld the Wagner Act, and in May it validated the Social Security Act. Whatever the reasons for the decisions, the Court’s newly moderate position made the Court-packing bill seem unnecessary. Congress ultimately defeated it. On one level, Franklin Roosevelt had achieved a victory. The Court was no longer an obstacle to New Deal reforms. But the Court-packing episode did lasting political damage to the administration. From 1937 on, southern Democrats and other conservatives voted against Roosevelt’s measures much more often than they had in the past.

Retrenchment and Recession
 By the summer of 1937, the national income—which had dropped from $82 billion in 1929 to $40 billion in 1932—had risen to nearly $72 billion. Other economic indices also showed similar advances. Roosevelt seized on these improvements as a justification for trying to balance the federal budget. Between January and August 1937,

CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT SPEAKS ON THE
REORGANIZATION OF THE JUDICIARY
 Franklin D. Roosevelt made masterful use of the radio to explain his policies to the American people and win their support and ­affection. On Tuesday, March 9, 1937, he went on the air to defend his controversial ­proposal for reforming the courts. The president couched his ­appeal within a broader summary of the New Deal’s accomplishments. Tonight, sitting at my desk in the White House, I make my first radio report to the people in my second term of office. I am reminded of that evening in March, four years ago, when I made my first radio report to you. We were then in the midst of the great banking crisis. Soon after, with the authority of the Congress, we asked the Nation to turn over all of its privately held gold, dollar for dollar, to the Government of the United States. Today’s recovery proves how right that policy was. [. . .] In 1933 you and I knew that we must never let our economic system get completely out of joint again—that we could not afford to take the risk of another great depression. We also became convinced that the only way to avoid a repetition of those dark days was to have a government with power to prevent and to cure the abuses and the inequalities which had thrown that system out of joint. We then began a program of remedying those abuses and inequalities—to give balance and stability to our economic system—to make it bomb-proof against the causes of 1929. Today we are only part-way through that program—and recovery is speeding up to a point where the dangers of 1929 are again becoming possible, not this week or month perhaps, but within a year or two. 604 •

 National laws are needed to complete that program. Individual or local or state effort alone cannot protect us in 1937 any better than ten years ago. It will take time—and plenty of time—to work out our remedies administratively even after legislation is passed. To complete our program of protection in time, therefore, we cannot delay one moment in making certain that our National Government has power to carry through. Four years ago action did not come until the eleventh hour. It was almost too late. If we learned anything from the depression we will not allow ourselves to run around in new circles of futile discussion and debate, always postponing the day of decision. The American people have learned from the depression. For in the last three national elections an overwhelming majority of them voted a mandate that the Congress and the President begin the task of providing that protection—not after long years of debate, but now. The Courts, however, have cast doubts on the ability of the elected Congress to protect us against catastrophe by meeting squarely our modern social and economic conditions. We are at a crisis in our ability to proceed with that protection. It is a quiet crisis. There are no lines of depositors outside closed banks. But to the far-sighted it is far-reaching in its possibilities of injury to America. I want to talk with you very simply about the need for present action in this crisis— the need to meet the unanswered challenge of one-third of a Nation ill-nourished, illclad, ill-housed. Last Thursday I described the American form of Government as a three horse team provided by the Constitution to the American people so that their field might be plowed. The three horses are, of course,

 the three branches of government—the Congress, the Executive and the Courts. Two of the horses are pulling in unison ­today; the third is not. Those who have intimated that the President of the United States is trying to drive that team, overlook the simple fact that the President, as Chief Executive, is himself one of the three horses. It is the American people themselves who are in the driver’s seat. It is the American people themselves who want the furrow plowed. It is the American people themselves who expect the third horse to pull in unison with the other two. [. . .] [S]ince the rise of the modern movement for social and economic progress through legislation, the Court has more and more often and more and more boldly asserted a power to veto laws passed by the Congress and State Legislatures [. . .]. In the last four years the sound rule of giving statutes the benefit of all reasonable doubt has been cast aside. The Court has been acting not as a judicial body, but as a policy-making body. When the Congress has sought to stabilize national agriculture, to improve the conditions of labor, to safeguard business against unfair competition, to protect our national resources, and in many other ways, to serve our clearly national needs, the majority of the Court has been assuming the power to pass on the wisdom of these acts of the Congress—and to approve or disapprove the public policy written into these laws. [. . .] We have, therefore, reached the point as a nation where we must take action to

 save the Constitution from the Court and the Court from itself. We must find a way to take an appeal from the Supreme Court to the Constitution itself. We want a Supreme Court which will do justice under the Constitution and not over it. In our courts we want a government of laws and not of men. [. . .] What is my proposal? It is simply this: whenever a Judge or Justice of any Federal Court has reached the age of seventy and does not avail himself of the opportunity to retire on a pension, a new member shall be appointed by the President then in office, with the approval, as required by the Constitution, of the Senate of the United States. [. . .] Those opposing this plan have sought to arouse prejudice and fear by crying that I am seeking to “pack” the Supreme Court and that a baneful precedent will be established. What do they mean by the words “packing the Court”? UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE 1. According to President Roosevelt, what

 had been most important for economic reform and recovery? How did he assess this recovery? 2. How were the three branches of government supposed to work, in the president’s view? 3. What criticism did the president level against the courts? What solution did he offer? Was this conflict between the executive branch and the United States Supreme Court unique to the New Deal?

Source: On the Reorganization of the Judiciary, Tuesday, March 9, 1937 [35:28] WH, Fireside Chats of Franklin D.
Roosevelt, Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential Library, Hyde Park, New York.


 for example, he cut the WPA in half, laying off 1.5 million relief workers. A few weeks later, the fragile boom collapsed. The index of industrial production dropped from 117 in August 1937 to 76 in May 1938. Four million additional workers lost their jobs. Economic conditions were soon almost as bad as they had been in the bleak days of 1932–1933. • 605

606 • CHAPTER 24


 The recession of 1937, known to the president’s critics as the “Roosevelt recession,” was a result of many factors. But to many observers at the time, it seemed to be a direct result of the administration’s unwise decision to reduce spending. And so in April 1938, the president asked Congress for an emergency appropriation of $5 billion for public works and relief programs, and government funds soon began pouring into the economy once again. Within a few months, another tentative recovery seemed to be under way. At about the same time, Roosevelt sent a stinging message to Congress, vehemently denouncing what he called an “unjustifiable concentration of economic power” and asking for the creation of a commission to consider major reforms in the antitrust laws. In response, Congress established the Temporary National Economic Committee (TNEC), whose members included representatives of both houses of Congress and officials from several executive agencies. Later in 1938, the administration successfully supported one of its most ambitious pieces of labor legislation, the Fair Labor Standards Act, which for the first time established a national minimum wage and a forty-hour workweek and which also placed strict limits on child labor. Despite these achievements, however, by the end of 1938 the New Deal had essentially End of the New Deal come to an end. Congressional opposition now made it difficult for the president to enact any major new programs. But more important, perhaps, the threat of world crisis hung heavy in the political atmosphere, and Roosevelt was gradually growing more concerned with persuading a reluctant nation to prepare for war than with pursuing new avenues of reform. Sources of the “Roosevelt Recession”

LIMITS AND LEGACIES OF THE NEW DEAL
 The New Deal made major changes in American government, some of them still controversial today. It also left important problems unaddressed.

African Americans and the New Deal
 The New Deal was not hostile to black aspirations. Eleanor Roosevelt spoke throughout the 1930s on behalf of racial justice and put continuing pressure on her husband and others in the federal government to ease discrimination against blacks. The president himself appointed a number of African Americans to significant second-level positions in his administration, creating an informal network of officeholders that became known The “Black Cabinet” as the “Black Cabinet.” Eleanor Roosevelt, Interior Secretary Harold Ickes, and WPA Director Harry Hopkins all made efforts to ensure that New Deal relief ­programs did not exclude blacks. By 1935 an estimated 30 percent of all African Americans were receiving some form of government assistance, even amid persistent racial discrimination against people of color by the administrators of aid. One result was a historic change in black electoral behavior. As late as 1932, most American blacks were voting Republican, as they had been doing since the Civil War. By 1936, more than 90 percent were voting Democratic. African Americans supported Franklin Roosevelt, but they had few illusions that the New Deal represented a major turning point in American race relations. The president was, for example, never willing to risk losing the support of southern Democrats by supporting legislation to make lynching a federal crime or to ban

THE NEW DEAL
• 607 

 the poll tax, one of the most potent tools by which white southerners kept blacks from voting. New Deal relief agencies did not challenge, and indeed reinforced, existing patterns of discrimination. The CCC established separate black camps. The NRA codes tolerated paying blacks less than whites doing the same jobs. The WPA routinely relegated African Americans and Hispanic workers to the least-skilled and lowest-paying jobs; when funding ebbed, African Americans, like women, were among the first Discrimination Reinforced to be dismissed. The New Deal was not hostile to African Americans, and it made some contributions to their progress. But it never made racial justice a significant part of its agenda.

The New Deal and the “Indian Problem”
 New Deal policy toward the Indian tribes marked a significant break from earlier approaches, largely because of the efforts of the extraordinary commissioner of Indian affairs, John Collier. Collier was greatly influenced by the work of twentieth-century anthropologists who advanced the idea of cultural relativism—the theory that every culture should be accepted and respected on its own terms. Collier wanted to reverse the pressures on Native Americans to assimilate and instead allow them to remain Indians. He effectively promoted legislation—which became the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934—that restored to John Collier’s Advocacy the tribes the right to own land ­collectively and to elect tribal governments. In the thirteen years after passage of the 1934 bill, tribal land increased by nearly 4 million acres, and Indian agricultural income increased from under $2 million in 1934 to over $49 million in 1947. Even with the redistribution of lands under the 1934 act, however, Indians continued to possess, for the most part, only territory whites did not want—much of it arid, some of it desert. And as a group, they continued to constitute the poorest segment of the population.

Women and the New Deal
 Symbolically at least, the New Deal marked a breakthrough in the role of women in public life. Roosevelt appointed the first female member of the cabinet in the nation’s history: Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins. He also named more than 100 Frances Perkins other women to positions at lower levels of the federal bureaucracy. But the administration was concerned not so much about achieving gender equality as about obtaining special protections for women. The New Deal generally supported the widespread belief that in hard times women should withdraw from the workplace to open up more jobs for men. New Deal relief agencies offered relatively little employment for women. The Social Security ­program excluded domestic servants, waitresses, and other predominantly female occupations. Repeating its handling of racial justice, the New Deal was not actively hostile to feminist aspirations, but it accepted prevailing cultural norms. There was not yet sufficient political pressure from women themselves to persuade the administration to do otherwise. Indeed, some of the most important supporters of policies that reinforced traditional ­gender roles (such as Social Security) were themselves women.

608 • CHAPTER 24


ELEANOR ROOSEVELT
First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt was among the first women to play an important role in politics and government. She oversaw Franklin Roosevelt’s political campaigns before he became president as well as developing an important career of her own working on social programs in New York. When she moved to the White House, she championed human rights issues. In this photograph she is on the way to inspect a Washington, D.C., jail that had a reputation for being overcrowded and obsolete. (© Underwood & Underwood/Corbis) 
The New Deal and the West
 One part of American society that did receive special attention from the New Deal was the American West. The West received more government funds per capita through relief programs than any other region. Except for the TVA, the largest New Deal public works programs—the great dams and power stations—were mainly in the West, both because the best locations for such facilities were there and because the West had the greatest need for new sources of water and power. The Grand Coulee Dam on the Columbia River was the largest public works project in American history to that point, and it provided cheap electric power for much of the Northwest. Its construction, and that of other, smaller dams and water projects, created a basis for economic development in the region. Without this enormous public investment by the federal government, much of the economic growth that transformed the West after World War II would have been much more difficult, if not impossible, to achieve.

The New Deal, the Economy, and Politics
 The most frequent criticisms of the New Deal involve its failure to revive or reform the American economy. New Dealers never fully recognized the value of government spending as a vehicle for recovery. The economic boom sparked by World War II—not the New Deal—finally ended the crisis.

THE NEW DEAL
• 609 

 Nevertheless, the New Deal did have a number of important and lasting effects on the American economy. It helped elevate new groups—workers and farmers in particular—to positions from which they could at times challenge the power of the corporations. It increased the regulatory functions of the federal government in ways that helped stabilize previously troubled areas of the economy: the stock market, the banking system, and ­others. And the administration helped establish the basis for new forms of federal fiscal policy, which in the postwar years would give the government tools for promoting and regulating economic growth. The New Deal also created the rudiments of the American welfare state through its many relief programs and, above all, through the Social Security system. The conservative inhibitions New Dealers brought to this task ensured that the welfare system that ultimately emerged would be limited in its impact, would reinforce some traditional patterns of gender and racial discrimination, and would be expensive and cumbersome to administer. But for all its limits, the new system marked a historic break with the nation’s traditional reluctance to offer public assistance to its neediest citizens. Finally, the New Deal had a dramatic effect on the character of American politics. It took a weak and divided Democratic Party, which had been a minority force in American politics for many decades, and turned it into a mighty coalition that would dominate national party competition for more than thirty years. It turned the attention of many voters away from some of the controversial cultural issues that had preoccupied them in the 1920s and awakened an interest in economic matters of direct importance to the lives of citizens.

CONCLUSION
 From the time of Franklin Roosevelt’s inauguration in 1933 to the beginning of World War II eight years later, the federal government engaged in a broad and diverse series of experiments designed to relieve the distress of unemployment and poverty; to reform the economy to prevent future crises; and to bring the Great Depression itself to an end. It had only partial success in all those efforts. Unemployment and poverty remained high throughout the New Deal, although many federal programs provided assistance to millions of people who would otherwise have had none. The structure of the American economy remained essentially the same as it had been in earlier years, although there were by the end of the New Deal some important new regulatory agencies in Washington—and an important new role for organized labor. The New Deal failed to end the Great Depression. But some of its policies kept the Depression from getting worse; others helped alleviate the suffering of people caught in its grip; and still others pointed the way toward more effective economic policies in the future. Perhaps the most important legacy of the New Deal was to create a sense of possibilities among many Americans. The New Deal persuaded many citizens that the fortunes of individuals need not be left entirely to chance or to the workings of an unregulated market. Many Americans, Republicans and Democrats alike, emerged from the 1930s convinced that individuals deserved some protections from the unpredictability and instability of the modern economy. The New Deal—for all its limitations— had demonstrated the value of enlisting government in the effort to provide those protections.

610 • CHAPTER 24


KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
Agricultural Adjustment
 Administration (AAA) 590 Charles E. Coughlin 597 Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) 593 Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) 599 Court-packing plan 603 Eleanor Roosevelt 606 Farm Security Administration 590 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) 589

 fireside chats 588 Frances Perkins 607 Harry P. Hopkins 601 Huey Long 597 John Collier 607 John L. Lewis 599 Liberty League 596 National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) 598 National Recovery Administration (NRA) 590 New Deal 594 Second New Deal 598

Securities and Exchange
 Commission (SEC) 589 sit-down strike 599 Social Security Act 600 Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) 591 Townsend Plan 596 Works Progress Administration (WPA) 601

RECALL AND REFLECT
 1. 	What New Deal programs were aimed at agricultural and industrial recovery,

 and what was the effect of the programs in both areas? 2. 	What criticisms did critics on both the right and the left level at the New Deal? How

 did FDR and his administration respond to these criticisms? 3. 	What gains did organized labor make during the 1930s? 4. 	What was the impact of the New Deal on women?



THE GLOBAL
CRISIS, 1921–1941
THE DIPLOMACY OF THE NEW ERA
ISOLATIONISM AND INTERNATIONALISM
FROM NEUTRALITY TO INTERVENTION


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. What are some of the views that Americans expressed as the world crises of the 1930s expanded? 2. How did the economic crisis of the worldwide Great Depression help create new political orders in many nations? 3. What was the sequence of events between 1939 and 1941 that brought the United States into military involvement in World War II?

HENRY CABOT LODGE OF MASSACHUSETTS,
Republican chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, led the fight that defeated ratification of the Treaty of Versailles in 1919 and 1920. As a result, the United States declined to join the League of Nations. American foreign policy embarked instead on an independent course that for the next two decades would attempt, but ultimately fail, to expand American influence in the world without committing the United States to any lasting relationships with other nations. Lodge was not an isolationist. He believed the United States should exert its influence internationally. But he believed, too, that the United States should remain unfettered by obligations to anyone else. He said in 1919: We are a great moral asset of Christian civilization. . . . How did we get there? By our own efforts. Nobody led us, nobody guided us, nobody controlled us. . . . I would keep America as she has been—not isolated, not prevent her from joining other nations for . . . great purposes—but I wish her to be master of her own fate. 
 In the end, the limited American internationalism of the interwar years proved insufficient to protect the interests of the United States, to create global stability, or to keep the nation from becoming involved in the most catastrophic war in human history.

• 611


THE DIPLOMACY OF
THE NEW ERA


TIME LINE
Dawes Plan
Kellogg-Briand Pact
 Japan invades Manchuria

 Critics in the 1920s often described American foreign policy with a single word: isolationism. But in reality, the United States played a more active role in world affairs in the 1920s than it had at almost any previous time in its history.

 U.S. recognizes Soviet Union Good Neighbor Policy Roosevelt’s “quarantine” speech Munich Conference Nazi–Soviet nonaggression pact Germany invades Poland Tripartite Pact America First Committee founded Roosevelt reelected Destroyers-for-bases deal Lend-lease plan Atlantic Charter Japan attacks Pearl Harbor U.S. enters World War II

612 •


Replacing the League
 By the time the Harding administration took office in 1921, American membership in the League of Nations was no longer a realistic possibility. But Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes wanted to find a replacement for the League as a guarantor of world peace and stability. The most important effort was the Washington Conference of 1921—an attempt to prevent a destabilizing naval armaments race among the United States, Britain, and Japan. Hughes proposed a plan for dramatic reductions in the fleets of all three nations and a ten-year moratorium on the construction of large warships. To the surprise of almost everyone, the conference ultimately agreed to accept most of Hughes’s terms. The Five-Power Pact of February 1922 established limits for total naval tonnage and a ratio of armaments among the signatories. For every 5 tons of American and British warships, Japan would maintain 3 and France and Italy 1.75 each. When the French foreign minister, Aristide Briand, asked the United States in 1927 to join an alliance against Germany, Secretary of State Frank Kellogg (who had replaced Hughes in 1925) proposed instead a multilateral treaty outlawing war as an instrument of national policy. Fourteen nations signed the agreement in Paris on August 27, 1928, amid wide international acclaim. Forty-eight other nations later joined the Kellogg-Briand Pact. It contained no instruments of enforcement.

THE GLOBAL CRISIS, 1921–1941
• 613 

Debts and Diplomacy
 The first responsibility of diplomacy, Hughes, Kellogg, and others agreed, was to ensure that American overseas trade faced no obstacles. The Allied powers of Europe were struggling to repay $11 billion in loans they had contracted with the United States during and shortly after the war. At the same time, Germany was attempting to pay the reparations levied by the Allies. The United States stepped in with a solution. Charles G. Dawes, an American banker who became vice president under Coolidge in 1925, negotiated an agreement in 1924 among France, Britain, Germany, and the United States. Under the Dawes Plan, American banks would provide enormous The Dawes Plan loans to Germany, which would use that money to pay reparations to France and Britain; Britain and France would agree to reduce the amount of those payments and, in turn, use those funds (as well as the large loans they themselves were receiving from American banks) to repay war debts to the United States. One historian said of this circular plan, “It would have made equal sense for the U.S. to have taken the money out of one drawer in the Treasury and put it into another.” The flow of funds was able to continue only by virtue of the enormous debts the European nations were acquiring to American banks and corporations. The American economic involvement in Europe continued to expand until the worldwide depression shattered the system in 1931. During the 1920s, American military forces maintained a presence in Nicaragua, Panama, and several other countries in the region, while United States investments in Latin America more than doubled. American banks offered large loans to Latin American governments, just as in Europe; and as with the Europeans, the Latin Americans had difficulty earning the money to repay them in the face of the formidable United States tariff barrier.

Hoover and the World Crisis
 By 1931, the world financial crisis had produced a rising nationalism in Europe and Japan. It soon toppled some existing political leaders and replaced them with powerful, belligerent governments committed to expansion. Herbert Hoover thus confronted the beginning of a process that would ultimately lead to war. In Latin America, Hoover tried to repair some of the damage done by earlier American policies. He made a ten-week goodwill tour through Latin America before his inauguration. Once in office, he generally abstained from intervening in the internal affairs of neighboring nations and moved to withdraw American troops from Nicaragua and Haiti. He also announced a new policy: America would grant diplomatic recognition to any sitting ­government in the region without questioning the means it had used to obtain power. He even repudiated the Theodore Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine by refusing to permit American intervention when several Latin American countries defaulted on debt obligations in October 1931. In Europe, the administration enjoyed few successes. When Hoover’s proposed moratorium on debts failed to produce financial stability, he refused to cancel all war debts to the United States as many economists advised him to do. Several European nations promptly went into default. Efforts to extend the 1921 limits on naval construction fell victim to French and British fears of German and Japanese militarism. The ineffectiveness of American diplomacy in Europe was particularly troubling in light of the rise of fascism, an ideology that rejected democratic forms of government in favor of concentrated state power under a dictator. Benito Mussolini’s Fascist Party had

AMERICA IN THE WORLD


The Sino-Japanese War,
1931–1941
 Long before Pearl Harbor, well before war broke out in Europe in 1939, the first shots of what would become World War II had been fired in the Pacific in a conflict between Japan and China. Having lived in almost complete isolation from the world until the nineteenth century, Japan emerged from World War I as one of the world’s great powers, with a proud and powerful military and growing global trade. But the Great Depression created severe economic problems for the Japanese; and as in other parts of the world, the crisis strengthened the political influence of highly nationalistic armed forces. Out of the Japanese military emerged dreams of a new empire in the Pacific. Such an ­empire would, its proponents believed, give the nation access to fuel, raw material, ­markets for its industries, as well as land for its agricultural needs and its rapidly increasing population. Such an empire, ­ they also argued, would free Asia from its exploitation by Europe and America and would ­create a “new world order based on moral principles.” During World War I, Japan had taken ­territory and economic concessions from China and had created a particularly strong presence in the northern Chinese region of Manchuria. There, in September 1931, a group of young, militant army officers seized on a railway explosion to justify a military campaign through which they conquered the entire province. Both the United States government and the League of Nations ­demanded that Japan evacuate Manchuria. The Japanese ignored them and for the next six years consolidated its control over the new territory. 614 •

 On July 7, 1937, Japan began a wider war when it attacked Chinese troops at the Marco Polo Bridge outside Beijing. Over the next few weeks, Japanese forces overran a large part of southern China, including most of the port cities, killing many Chinese soldiers and civilians in the process. Particularly notorious was the Japanese annihilation of many thousands of civilians in the city of Nanjing (the number has long been in dispute, but estimates range from 80,000 to over 300,000) in an event that became known in China and the West as the “Rape of Nanjing,” or the Nanjing Massacre. The Chinese government fled to the mountains. As in 1931, the United States and the League of Nations protested in vain. China was a nation in turmoil. It was ­engaged in a civil war of its own—between the so-called Kuomintang, a nationalist party led by Chiang Kai-shek, and the Chinese Communist Party, led by Mao Zedong; and this internal struggle weakened China’s ­capacity to resist. But beginning in 1937, the two rivals agreed to an uneasy truce and began fighting the Japanese together, with some success—bogging the Japanese military down in a seemingly endless war and imposing great hardships on the Japanese people at home. The Japanese government and military, however, remained determined to continue the war against China, whatever the sacrifices. One result of the costs of the war in China was a growing Japanese dependence on the United States for steel and oil to meet civilian and military needs. In July 1941, in an effort to pressure the Japanese to stop their expansion, the Roosevelt ­administration made it impossible for the

 Japanese to continue buying American oil. Japan now faced a choice between ending its war in China or finding other sources of fuel to keep its war effort (and its civilian economy) going. Japan chose to extend the war beyond China in a search for oil. The best available sources were in the Dutch East Indies. But the only way to secure that European colony, the Japanese believed, would be to neutralize the increasingly hostile United States in Asia. Visionary military planners in Japan began advocating a daring move to immobilize the Americans in the Pacific before expanding

 the war elsewhere—with an attack on the American naval base at Pearl Harbor. The first blow of World War II in America, therefore, was the culmination of more than a decade of Japanese efforts to conquer China.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. What were the goals of the Japanese

 militarists in the 1930s that led to the attacks on China? 2. Why was China unable to stop Japanese aggression in the 1930s?

 been in control of Italy since the early 1920s and had become increasingly nationalistic and militaristic. Still more ominous was the growing power of the National Socialist (or Nazi) Party in Germany. By the late 1920s, the Weimar Hitler and Mussolini in Europe Republic, the nation’s government since the end of World War I, had been largely discredited by, among other things, a ruinous inflation. Adolf Hitler, the leader of the Nazis, grew rapidly in popular favor and took power in 1933. He believed in, among other things, the genetic superiority of the Aryan (German) people and in extending German territory to provide Lebensraum (living space) for what he called the German “master race.” He displayed a pathological anti-Semitism and a passionate militarism. More immediately alarming to the Hoover administration was a major crisis in Asia— another early step toward World War II. The Japanese, suffering from an economic depression of their own, were concerned about the increasing power of the Soviet Union and

HITLER AND MUSSOLINI IN BERLIN
The German and Italian dictators (shown here reviewing Nazi troops in Berlin in the mid-1930s) acted publicly as if they were equals. Privately, Hitler treated Mussolini with contempt, and Mussolini complained constantly of being a junior partner in the relationship. (© Instituto Nazionale Luce/ Alinari/Getty Images) 
• 615


