THE COLLISION
OF CULTURES
AMERICA BEFORE COLUMBUS
EUROPE LOOKS WESTWARD
THE ARRIVAL OF THE ENGLISH


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. How did the societies of native people in the South differ from those in the North in the precontact period (before the arrival of the Europeans)? 2. What effects did the arrival of Europeans have on the native peoples of the Americas? 3. How did patterns of settlement differ among the Spanish, English, French, and Dutch immigrants to the Americas?

THE DISCOVERY OF THE AMERICAS
did not begin with Christopher Columbus. It began many thousands of years earlier, when human beings first crossed into the new continents and began to people them. By the end of the fifteenth century a.d., when the first important contact with Europeans occurred, the Americas were home to millions of men and women. These ancient civilizations had experienced many changes and many catastrophes during their long history. But it is likely that none of these experiences was as tragically transforming as the arrival of Europeans. In the first violent years of Spanish and Portuguese exploration and conquest, the impact of the new arrivals was profound. Europeans brought with them diseases (most notably smallpox) to which natives, unlike the invaders, had no immunity. The result was a great demographic catastrophe that killed millions of people, weakened existing societies, and greatly aided the Spanish and Portuguese in their rapid and devastating takeover of the existing American empires. But the European immigrants were never able to eliminate the influence of the indigenous peoples (whom they came to call “Indians”). In their many interactions, whether beneficial or ruinous, these very different civilizations shaped one another, learned from one another, and changed one another permanently and profoundly. 
•1


AMERICA BEFORE
COLUMBUS


TIME LINE
 11,000 years ago Migrations into the Americas begin

 Cabot explores North America

 Columbus’s first transatlantic voyage African slaves arrive in Spanish America

1518–1530
 Smallpox ravages Indians

1519–1522
 Magellan expedition circumnavigates globe

 Elizabeth I becomes English Queen

St. Augustine, Florida,
 founded

 Second attempt to establish Roanoke colony





 James I becomes English King

 Jamestown founded Spanish found Santa Fe

2•


 French establish Quebec

 We know relatively little about the first peoples in the Americas, but archaeologists have uncovered new evidence from artifacts that have survived over many millennia. We continue to learn more about the ­earliest Americans.

The Peoples of the Precontact
Americas
 For many decades, scholars believed that all early migrations into the Americas came from humans crossing an ancient land bridge over the Bering Strait into what is now Alaska, approximately 11,000 years ago. The migrations were probably a result of the development of new stone tools—spears and other hunting implements—used to pursue the large animals that crossed between Asia and North America. All of these land-based migrants are thought to have come from a Mongolian stock related to that of modern-day Siberia. Scholars refer to these migrants as the “Clovis” people, so named for a town in New Mexico where archaeologists first discovered evidence of their tools and weapons in the 1930s. More recent archaeological evidence suggests that not all the early migrants to the Americas came across the Bering Strait. Some migrants from Asia appear to have settled as far south as Chile and Peru even before people began moving into North America by land. These first South Americans may have come not by land but by sea, using boats. This new evidence suggests that the early population of the Americas was more diverse and more scattered than scholars used to believe. Recent DNA evidence has identified a possible early population group that does not seem to have Asian characteristics. This suggests that thousands of years before Columbus, there may have been some migration from Europe.

THE COLLISION OF CULTURES
• 3 

Ber


 ing

St


 ra

 it

 pi R ip

Mis
 sis s

.


Miss
 our

 Extent of ice cap during most recent glaciation Adena cultures Hopewell cultures

Mesa Verde
Canyon de
Chelly


ANASAZI


 io Oh

Chaco Canyon
Poverty
Point


HOHOKAM


Primary Mississippian
 cultures

R.


 i R.

 Bering land bridge

MOGOLLON


 Possible migration routes of early Indians Adena/Hopewell site Mississippian site Mayan site Olmec site Southwestern site

 This map tracks some of the very early migrations into, and within, North America in the centuries preceding contact with Europe. The map shows the now-vanished land bridge between Siberia and Alaska over which thousands, perhaps millions, of migrating people passed into the Americas. It also shows the locations of some of the earliest settlements in North America. • What role did the extended glacial field in what is now Canada play in residential patterns in the ancient American world? NORTH AMERICAN MIGRATIONS

 The Archaic period is a scholarly term for the early history of humans in America, beginning around 8000 b.c. In the first part of this period, most humans The Archaic Period supported themselves through hunting and gathering, using the same stone tools that earlier Americans had brought with them from Asia. Later in the Archaic period, population groups began to expand their activities and to develop new tools, such as nets and hooks for fishing, traps for smaller animals, and baskets for gathering berries, nuts, seeds, and other plants. Still later, some groups began to farm. Farming, of course, requires people to stay in one place. In agricultural areas, the first sedentary settlements slowly began to form, creating the basis for larger ­civilizations.

4 • CHAPTER 1


The Growth of Civilizations: The South
 The most elaborate early civilizations emerged in South and Central America and in Mexico. In Peru, the Incas created the largest empire in the Americas, stretching almost The Inca in Peru 2,000 miles along western South America. The Incas developed a complex administrative system and a large network of paved roads that welded together the populations of many tribes under a single government. Organized societies of Mesoamericans emerged around 10,000 b.c. They created a Mesoamerican Civilizations civilization in what is now Mexico and much of Central America. They were known as the Olmec people. The first truly complex society in the region began in approximately 1000 b.c. A more sophisticated culture grew up around a.d. 800 in parts of Central America and in the Yucatán peninsula of Mexico, in an area known as Maya. Mayan civilization developed a written language, a numerical system similar to the Arabic, an accurate calendar, an advanced agricultural system, and important trade routes into other areas of the continents. Gradually, the societies of the Maya region were superseded by other Mesoamerican tribes, who have become known collectively (and somewhat inaccurately) as the Aztec. They called themselves Mexica. In about a.d. 1300, the Mexica built the city of Tenochtitlán on a large island in a lake in central Mexico, the site of present-day Mexico City. With a population as high as 100,000 by 1500, Tenochtitlán featured large and impressive public buildings, schools that all male children attended, an organized military, a medical system, and a slave workforce drawn from conquered tribes. A warlike people, the Mexica gradually established their dominance over almost all of central Mexico. Like other Mesoamerican societies, the Mexica developed a religion that included a belief that the gods could be satisfied only by being fed the living hearts of humans. The Mexica sacrificed people—largely prisoners captured in combat—on a scale unknown in other American civilizations. The Mesoamerican civilizations were for many centuries the center of civilized life in North and Central America—the hub of culture and trade.

The Civilizations of the North
 The peoples north of Mexico developed less elaborate but still substantial civilizations. Inhabitants of the northern regions of the continent subsisted on combinations of hunting, Hunting, Gathering, and Fishing gathering, and fishing. They included the Eskimo (or Inuit) of the Arctic Circle, who fished and hunted seals; big-game hunters of the northern forests, who led nomadic lives based on the pursuit of moose and caribou; tribes of the Pacific Northwest, whose principal occupation was salmon fishing and who created substantial permanent settlements along the coast; and a group of tribes spread through relatively arid regions of the Far West, who developed successful communities based on fishing, hunting small game, and gathering edible plants. Other societies in North America were agricultural. Among the most developed were Agricultural Societies those in the Southwest. The people of that arid region built large irrigation systems, and they constructed towns of stone and adobe. In the Great Plains region, too, most tribes were engaged in sedentary farming (corn and other grains). They lived in large permanent settlements. The eastern third of what is now the United States—much of it covered with forests and inhabited by the Woodland Indians—had the greatest food resources of any area of the continent. Most of the many tribes of the region engaged in farming, hunting, ­gathering,

THE COLLISION OF CULTURES
• 5 

INUIT


ARCTIC


TLINGIT


INUIT


TSHIMSHIAN


NORTHWEST
COAST KWAKIUTLS
MAKAH
SALISH


CREE
KOOTENAY
BLACKFEET


SKAGIT
PUYALLUP


PLATEAU


WALLA
UMATILLA WALLA
CAYUSE
TILLAMOOK


POMO


ASSINIBOINE


COLVILLE


CHINOOK


PACIFIC
OCEAN


HIDATSA
SIOUX
MANDAN
ARAPAHO
KIOWA


CROW


APACHEAN


PAWNEE


SHOSHONE
MAIDU


GREAT BASIN


CHEMEHUEVI
CHUMASH SERRANO
CAHUILLA
LUISEÑO
DIEGUEÑO


CALIFORNIA


HOPI


ZUÑI


MENOMINEE


OTTAWA


ABENAKI


WAMPANOAG
MOHEGAN
HURON
PEQUOT
IROQUOIS
NEUTRAL
ERIE SUSQUEHANNOCK
NARRAGANSETT


WINNEBAGO
FOX
LENNI
POTAWATOMI
LENAPE
SAUK
KICKAPOO
MOSOPELEA
ILLINOIS
SHAWNEE
KASKASKIA


EASTERN
WOODLAND
CHEROKEE


WICHITA


APACHEAN


PAMLICO
TUSCARORA


ATLANTIC


CHICKASAW
CADDO


PUEBLO


OCEAN


CREEK


APACHEAN


YAMASEE


SOUTHWEST
CHOCTAW


JANO


YAQUI


NATCHEZ


APALACHEE


TIMUCUA


CONCHO
LAGUNERO


Agriculture
Hunting


CHIPPEWA


UTE


PIMA


Main Subsistence Mode


IOWA


PRAIRIE


GREAT
PLAINS


GOSHUTE
SHOSHONE


SOUTHERN
PAIUTE


MICMAC
PENOBSCOT


ALGONQUIN


CHIPPEWA


CHEYENNE SIOUX
FLATHEAD


NEZ
PERCÉ


NORTHERN
PAIUTE


KLAMATH
MODOC


COSTANO


MONTAGNAIS


SUBARCTIC


SHUSWAP


NOOTKIN


KARANKAWA


COAHUILTEC


NORTHEAST
MEXICO


CALUSA


CARIBBEAN
ARAWAK


 Hunting and gathering Fishing

 This map shows the various ways in which the native tribes of North America supported themselves before the arrival of European civilization. Like most precommercial peoples, the Native Americans survived largely on the resources available in their immediate surroundings. Note, for example, the reliance on the products of the sea of the tribes along the northern coastlines of the continent, and the way in which tribes in relatively inhospitable climates in the North—where agriculture was difficult—relied on hunting large game. Most Native Americans were farmers. • What different kinds of farming would have emerged in the very different climates of the agricultural regions shown on this map? HOW THE EARLY NORTH AMERICANS LIVED

 and fishing simultaneously. In the South there were permanent settlements and large trading networks based on the corn and other grains grown in the rich lands of the Mississippi River valley. Cahokia, a trading center located near present-day St. Louis, had a Cahokia population of 40,000 at its peak in a.d. 1200. The agricultural societies of the Northeast were more mobile. Farming techniques there were designed to exploit the land quickly rather than to develop permanent settlements. Many of the tribes living east of the Mississippi River were linked together loosely by common linguistic roots. The largest of these language groups consisted of the Algonquian tribes, who lived along the Atlantic seaboard from Canada to Virginia; the Iroquois Confederacy, which was centered in what is now upstate New York; and the Muskogean

6 • CHAPTER 1


 tribes, which consisted of the tribes in the southernmost regions of the eastern seaboard. Religion was usually closely linked with the natural world on which the tribes depended for sustenance. Native Americans worshiped many gods, whom they associated variously with crops, game, forests, rivers, and other elements of nature. All tribes assigned women the jobs of caring for children, preparing meals, and PUEBLO VILLAGE OF THE SOUTHWEST gathering certain foods. But the allocation (© C. McIntyre/PhotoLink/Getty Images) of other tasks varied from one society to another. Some tribal groups reserved farming tasks almost entirely for men. Among other Gender Relations groups, women tended the fields, whereas men engaged in hunting, warfare, or clearing land. Because women and children were often left alone for extended periods while men were away hunting or fighting, women in some tribes controlled the social and economic organization of the settlements.

EUROPE LOOKS WESTWARD
 Europeans were almost entirely unaware of the existence of the Americas before the fifteenth century. A few early wanderers—Leif Eriksson, an eleventh-century Norse seaman, and others—had glimpsed parts of the eastern Atlantic on their voyages. But even if their discoveries had become common knowledge (and they did not), there would have been little incentive for others to follow. Europe in the Middle Ages (roughly a.d. 500–1500) was too weak, divided, and decentralized to inspire many great ventures. By the end of the fifteenth century, however, conditions in Europe had changed and the incentive for overseas exploration had grown.

Commerce and Sea Travel
 Two important changes encouraged Europeans to look toward new lands. One was the ­significant growth in Europe’s population in the fifteenth century. The Black Death, a catastrophic epidemic of the bubonic plague that began in Constantinople in 1347, had killed more than a third of the people on the Continent (according to some estimates). But a century and European Population Growth a half later, the population had rebounded. With that growth came a reawakening of commerce. A new merchant class was emerging to meet the rising demand for goods from abroad. As trade increased, and as advances in navigation made long-distance sea travel more feasible, interest in expanding trade grew even more quickly. The second change was the emergence of new governments that were more united and Strong Monarchies powerful than the feeble political entities of the feudal past. In the western areas of Europe in particular, strong new monarchs were eager to enhance the commercial development of their nations. In the early fourteenth century, Marco Polo and other adventurers had returned from Asia bearing exotic spices, cloths, and dyes and even more exotic tales. Europeans who

THE COLLISION OF CULTURES
• 7 

 craved commercial glory had dreamed above all of trade with the East. For two centuries, that trade had been limited by the difficulties of the long overland journey to the Asian courts. But in the fourteenth century, talk of finding a faster, safer sea route to East Asia began. The Portuguese were the preeminent maritime power in the fifteenth century, largely because of Prince Henry the Navigator, who devoted much of his life to the promotion of exploration. In 1486, after Henry’s death, the Portuguese explorer Portuguese Exploration Bartholomeu Dias rounded the southern tip of Africa (the Cape of Good Hope). In 1497– 1498, Vasco da Gama proceeded all the way around the cape to India. But the Spanish, not the Portuguese, were the first to encounter the New World, the term Europeans applied to the ancient lands previously unknown to them.

Christopher Columbus
 Christopher Columbus was born and reared in Genoa, Italy. He spent his early seafaring years in the service of the Portuguese. By the time he was a young man, he had developed great ambitions. He believed he could reach East Asia by sailing west, across the Atlantic, rather than east, around Africa. Columbus thought the world was far smaller than it actually is. He also believed that the Asian continent extended farther eastward than it actually does. Most important, he did not realize that anything lay to the west between Europe and the lands of Asia. Columbus failed to enlist the leaders of Portugal to back his plan, so he turned instead to Spain. The marriage of Spain’s two most powerful regional rulers, Ferdinand of Aragon and Isabella of Castile, had produced the strongest and most ambitious monarchy in Europe. Columbus appealed to Queen Isabella for support for his proposed westward voyage, and in 1492, she agreed. Commanding ninety men and three Columbus’s First Voyage ships—the Niña, the Pinta, and the Santa María—Columbus left Spain in August 1492 and sailed west into the Atlantic. Ten weeks later, he sighted land and assumed he had reached an island off Asia. In fact, he had landed in the Bahamas. When he pushed on and encountered Cuba, he assumed he had reached China. He returned to Spain, bringing with him several captured natives as evidence of his achievement. (He called the natives “Indians” because he believed they were from the East Indies in the Pacific.) But Columbus did not, of course, bring back news of the great khan’s court in China or any samples of the fabled wealth of the Indies. And so a year later, he tried again, this time with a much larger expedition. As before, he headed into the Caribbean, discovering several other islands and leaving a small and short-lived colony on Hispaniola. On a third voyage, in 1498, he finally reached the mainland and cruised along the northern coast of South America. He then realized, for the first time, that he had encountered not a part of Asia but a separate continent. Columbus ended his life in obscurity. Ultimately, he was even unable to give his name to the land he had revealed to the Europeans. That distinction went instead to a Florentine merchant, Amerigo Vespucci, who wrote a series of vivid descriptions of the lands he ­visited on a later expedition to the New World and helped popularize the idea that the Americas were new continents. Partly as a result of Columbus’s initiative, Spain began to devote greater resources and energy to maritime exploration. In 1513, the Spaniard Vasco de Balboa crossed the Isthmus of Panama and became the first known European to gaze westward upon the great ocean that separated America from China. Seeking access to that ocean, Ferdinand Magellan, a Portuguese

8 • CHAPTER 1


R
ISHE
FROB76–78
16 1
HUDSON


LAB


GIL
BE


RAD


Hudson
Bay


OR


RT


W
FO
UN
D


T 14
CABO


LA
ND




 ren ce

Ri


 ve r

CA
RT
IER


NE
–35


Mi
 ss

NORTH


PO


NC
E


DE


Ri
 o

Veracruz




 a YUCATAN PENINSULA



C ar ib b ean
Se a


MAYA






LAN




SOUTH
AMERICA


KE


7–8


IS
TH 1502
MU
S O
Panama F PA
NAMA


Explorers’ Routes
Columbus (Spanish)


–2


Other Spanish


AT L A N T I C
OCEAN


Other European
French


31–33


MAG
EL


DR
A


PIZ
ARR
O 15


PA C I F I C
OCEAN


PA C I F I C
OCEAN


GH
LEI
RA


Orinoco


R.


1000 km






Santiago
 de Cuba

S1
IN
WK
HA






Mexico City
AZTEC EMPIRE

500 mi




5 13


Havana


8–21
T´ES 151
COR
Mayapan Chichen Itza




LEÓ
N1




 de an Gr

Gulf of
Mexico


La Paz




AT L A N T I C
OCEAN


OA


CORONA


Mississ


DO 1


 ippi

40–


R.




O1


AN


RAZ


VER


39–42


Cibola


Roanoke
DE SOTO


R.


 sa s

HAWKINS 158


R.
 io Oh

Ar


BAL
B


R.
 n ka

Co
 lo

R.


 do ra

 iss

 pi ip

AMERICA
 Drake’s Bay

St
.L


 aw

Missouri R.


Quito


SOUTH AMERICA


English
 Native American empires

INCA
EMPIRE


 This map shows the many voyages of exploration to and conquest of North America launched by Europeans in the late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Note how Columbus and the Spanish explorers who followed him tended to move quickly into the lands of Mexico, the Caribbean, and Central and South America, while the English and French explored the northern territories of North America. • What factors might have led these various nations to explore and colonize different areas of the New World? EUROPEAN EXPLORATION AND CONQUEST, 1492–1583

 in Spanish employ, found the strait that now bears his name at the southern end of South America, struggled through the stormy narrows and into the ocean (so calm by contrast that he christened it the Pacific), and then proceeded to the Philippines. There Magellan died in a conflict with natives, but his expedition went on to complete the Circumnavigation of the Globe

THE COLLISION OF CULTURES
• 9 

 first known circumnavigation of the globe (1519–1522). By 1550, Spaniards had explored the coasts of North America as far north as Oregon in the west and Labrador in the east.

The Spanish Empire
 In time, Spanish explorers in the New World stopped thinking of America simply as an obstacle to their search for a route to Asia and began instead to consider it a possible source of wealth in itself. The Spanish claimed for themselves the whole of the New World, except for a large part of the east coast of South America (today’s Brazil) that was reserved by a papal decree for the Portuguese. In 1518, Hernando Cortés, who had been an unsuccessful Spanish government official in Cuba for fourteen years, led a small military expedition (about 600 men) against the Aztecs in Mexico and their powerful emperor, Montezuma, after hearing stories of great treasures there. His first assault on Tenochtitlán, the Aztec capital, failed. But Cortés and his army had unwittingly exposed the natives to smallpox, to which the natives, unlike the Europeans, had developed no immunity. The epidemic decimated the Aztec population and made it possible for the Spanish to triumph in their second attempt at conquest. Through his ruthless suppression of the surviving natives, Cortés established himself as one of the most brutal of the Spanish conquistadores (conquerors). Twenty years later, Francisco Pizarro conquered Conquistadores the Incas in Peru and opened the way for other Spanish advances into South America. The first Spanish settlers in America were interested only in exploiting the American stores of gold and silver, and they were fabulously successful. For 300 years, beginning in the sixteenth century, the mines of Spanish America yielded more than ten times as much gold and silver as all the rest of the world’s mines combined. Before long, however, most Spanish settlers in America traveled to the New World for other reasons. Many went in hopes of profiting from agriculture. They helped establish elements of European

THE MEXICANS STRIKE BACK
In this vivid scene from the Durán Codex, Mexican artists illustrate a rare moment in which Mexican warriors gained the upper hand over the Spanish invaders. Driven back by native fighters, the Spanish have taken refuge in a room in the royal palace in Tenochtitlán while brightly attired Mexican warriors besiege them. Although the Mexicans gained a temporary advantage in this battle, the drawing illustrates one of the reasons for their inability to withstand the Spanish in the longer term. The Spanish soldiers are armed with rifles and crossbows, while the Indians carry only spears and shields. (© Biblioteca Nacional, Madrid, Spain/Bridgeman Images) 
CO NS IDER T HE S O URC E
BARTOLOMÉ DE LAS CASAS, “OF THE ISLAND
OF HISPANIOLA”
(1542)  Bartolomé de Las Casas, a Dominican friar from Spain, was an early European settler of the West Indies. He devoted much of his life to describing the culture of native peoples and chronicling the many abuses they suffered at the hands of their colonizers. This excerpt is from a letter he addressed to Spain’s Prince Philip. God has created all these numberless people to be quite the simplest, without malice or duplicity, most obedient, most faithful to their natural Lords, and to the Christians, whom they serve; the most humble, most patient, most peaceful and calm, without strife nor tumults; not wrangling, nor querulous, as free from uproar, hate and desire of revenge as any in the world . . . Among these gentle sheep, gifted by their Maker with the above qualities, the Spaniards entered as soon as they knew them, like wolves, tigers and lions which had been starving for many days, and since forty years they have done nothing else; nor do they afflict, torment, and destroy them with strange and new, and divers kinds of cruelty, never before seen, nor heard of, nor read of . . . The Christians, with their horses and swords and lances, began to slaughter and practice strange cruelty among them. They penetrated into the country and spared neither children nor the aged, nor pregnant women, nor those in child labour, all of whom they ran through the body and lacerated, as though they were assaulting so many lambs herded in their sheepfold. They made bets as to who would slit a man in two, or cut off his head at one blow: or they opened up his bowels. They tore the babes from their mothers’ breast by the feet, and dashed their heads

 against the rocks. Others they seized by the shoulders and threw into the rivers, laughing and joking, and when they fell into the water they ­exclaimed: “boil body of so and so!” They spitted the bodies of other babes, together with their mothers and all who were before them, on their swords. They made a gallows just high enough for the feet to nearly touch the ground, and by thirteens, in honor and reverence of our Redeemer and the twelve Apostles, they put wood underneath and, with fire, they burned the Indians alive. They wrapped the bodies of others ­entirely in dry straw, binding them in it and setting fire to it; and so they burned them. They cut off the hands of all they wished to take alive, made them carry them fastened on to them, and said: “Go and carry letters”: that is; take the news to those who have fled to the mountains. They generally killed the lords and ­nobles in the following way. They made wooden gridirons of stakes, bound them upon them, and made a slow fire beneath; thus the ­victims gave up the spirit by degrees, emitting cries of despair in their torture. UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE 1. How did Bartolomé de Las Casas

 c­ haracterize the natives? How do you think they would have responded to this description? 2. What metaphor did Las Casas use to ­describe the natives and where does this metaphor come from? 3. What role did Las Casas expect the Spaniards to play on Hispaniola? What did they do instead?

 Source: Francis Augustus MacNutt, Bartholomew de Las Casas: His Life, His Apostolate, and His Writings (New York: G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 1909), p. 14.

10 •


THE COLLISION OF CULTURES
• 11 

LOUISIANA
UNITED
STATES


(Spanish 1763-1800)
San Francisco (1776)
Taos (1609)


 n ra

2000 km


Mi
 ssi s s ip

SPANISH


 de

Gulf of F L O R I D A
 (to 1819) Mexico

Tampico


St. Augustine (1565)
Bahamas
 (to Britain 1646)

ATLANTIC OCEAN


VICEROYALTY
La Habana (1515) OF NEW SPAIN 
 Culiacán (1531) Mexico City (Tenochtitlán) (1325)



 pi R.

Santa Fe (1607)
San Luis Obispo (1772)
Los Angeles (1781)
San Juan Capistrano (1776)
San Diego de Alcala (1769)
Tucson
R io G
(1709)


1000 mi




Cuba
(1492)


 Yucatán Peninsula

Guatemala
(1519)


Jamaica
HAITI
 (to Britain (French 1655) after 1697)

Puerto Rico
(1502)
Santo
Domingo
(1496)


Caribbean Sea
Panama
(1519)


PACIFIC OCEAN


Espanola
(1492)


Santiago (1514)


Veracruz
(1519)


Santa Fe de Bogotá
(1538)
Quito
(1534)


Trinidad
(1498)
Caracas
(1567)
Orin
 oc o

Monterey (1770)




 (from 1783)

R.


SURINAM
(Dutch)


VICEROYALTY OF
NEW GRANADA


(1625)


FRENCH
GUIANA
(1626)


.
 zon R Ama

 Aztec Empire at the time of Spanish Conquest Inca Empire at the time of Spanish Conquest Colonial boundaries and provincial names are for the late 18th century OUTPOSTS ON THE NORTHERN FRONTIER OF NEW SPAIN (Not simultaneous; through the 18th century) Missions

O


VICEROYALTY
OF
LA PLATA


R


T


U


G


U


La Paz
(1548)


P


Paran
 a

VICEROYALTY
OF
NEW CASTILLA
(Peru)


ES


E


Cuzco
(1535)


R.


Cuidad de los
Reyes (Lima)
(1535)


BR


AZ


IL


Guayaquil
(1535)


Rio de Janeiro
(1567)
 São Paulo (1554)

Valparaiso
(1544)
Santiago (1541)
Montevideo
(1724)
Buenos Aires
(1580)


Rio de
 la Plata

 Forts (Sometimes with missions) Settlements

SPANISH AMERICA
From the time of Columbus’s initial voyage in 1492 until the mid-nineteenth century, Spain was the dominant colonial power in the New World. From the southern regions of South America to the northern regions of the Pacific Northwest, Spain controlled one of the world’s vastest empires. Note how much of the Spanish Empire was simply grafted upon the earlier empires of native peoples—the Incas in what is today Chile and Peru and the Aztecs across much of the rest of South America, Mexico, and the Southwest of what is now the United States. • What characteristics of Spanish colonization would account for their preference for already settled regions? 
 c­ ivilization permanently in America. Other Spaniards—priests, friars, and missionaries— went to America to spread the Christian religion; through their efforts, the influence of the Catholic Church ultimately extended throughout South and Central America and Mexico. One of the first friars to work in the colonies, Bartolomé de Las Casas fought for the fair treatment of native peoples by the Spanish as part of his ministry. (See “Consider the Source: Bartolomé de Las Casas, ‘Of the Island of Hispaniola’”).

12 • CHAPTER 1


 By the end of the sixteenth century, the Spanish Empire included the Caribbean islands, Mexico, and southern North America. It also spread into South America and included what is now Chile, Argentina, and Peru. In 1580, when the Spanish and Portuguese monarchies temporarily united, Brazil came under Spanish jurisdiction as well.

Northern Outposts
 In 1565, the Spanish established the fort of St. Augustine in Florida, their first permanent settlement in what is now the United States. But it was little more than a small military outpost. A more substantial colonizing venture began in the Southwest in 1598, when Don Juan de Oñate traveled north from Mexico with a party of 500, claimed for Spain some of the lands of the Pueblo Indians in what is now New Mexico, and began to establish a colony. Oñate granted encomiendas (the right to exact tribute and labor from the natives on large tracts of land) to favored Spaniards. In 1609, Spanish colonists founded Santa Fe. By 1680, there were over 2,000 Spanish colonists living among about 30,000 Pueblos. The economic heart of the colony was cattle and sheep, raised on the ranchos that stretched out around the small towns Spanish settlers established. Despite widespread conversions to Catholicism, most natives (including the converts) continued to practice their own traditional religious rituals. In 1680, Spanish priests and Popé the colonial government tried to suppress these rituals. In response, Popé, an Indian religious leader, led an uprising that killed hundreds of European settlers, captured Santa Fe, and drove the Spanish from the region. Twelve years later, the Spanish returned and crushed a last revolt in 1696. After the revolts, many Spanish colonists realized that they could not hope to prosper in New Mexico while in constant conflict with a native population that greatly outnumbered them. Although the Spanish intensified their efforts to assimilate the Indians, they also now permitted the Pueblos to own land. They stopped commandeering Indian labor, and they tolerated the survival of tribal religious rituals. There was significant intermarriage between Europeans and Indians. By 1750, the Spanish population had grown to about 4,000. The Pueblo population had declined (through disease, war, and migration) to about 13,000—less than half what it had been in 1680. New Mexico had by then become a reasonably stable but still weak and isolated outpost of the Spanish Empire.

St. Augustine and Santa Fe


Biological and Cultural Exchanges
 European and native cultures never entirely merged in the Spanish Empire. Nevertheless, the arrival of whites launched a process of interaction between different peoples that left no one unchanged. That Europeans were exploring the Americas at all was a result of early contacts with the natives, from whom they had learned of the rich deposits of gold and silver. From then on, the history of the Americas became one of increasing levels of exchanges—some Population Loss from Diseases beneficial, others catastrophic—among different peoples and cultures. The first and ­perhaps most profound result of this exchange was the importation of European diseases to the New World. It would be difficult to exaggerate the consequences of the exposure of Native Americans to such illnesses as influenza, measles, typhus, and above all smallpox. Although historians have debated the question of how many people lived in the Americas before the arrival of Europeans, it is estimated that

THE COLLISION OF CULTURES
• 13 

 millions died. (See “Debating the Past: Why Do Historians So Often Differ?”). In some areas, native populations were virtually wiped out within a few decades of their first contact with whites. On Hispaniola, where Columbus had landed in the 1490s, the native population quickly declined from approximately 1 million to about 500. In the Maya area of Mexico, as much as 95 percent of the population perished within a few years of the natives’ first contact with the Spanish. Many (although not all) of the tribes north of Mexico were spared the worst of the epidemics. But for other areas of the New World, this was a disaster at least as grave as, and in some places far worse than, the Black Death that had killed over one-third of the population of Europe two centuries before. Some Europeans, watching this biological catastrophe, saw it as evidence of God’s will that they should dominate the New World—and its native population. The decimation of native populations in the southern regions of the Americas was not only a result of exposure to infection. It was also a result of the conquistadores’ deliberate policy of subjugation and extermination. Their brutality was in part a reflection of the ruthlessness with which Europeans waged war in all parts of the world. It was also a result of their conviction that the natives were “savages”—uncivilized peoples who could be treated as somehow not fully human. By the 1540s, the combined effects of European diseases and European military brutality had all but Population Loss from Military Brutality destroyed the empires of Mexico and South America. Not all aspects of the exchange were disastrous to the Indians. The Europeans introduced to the natives important new crops (among them sugar and bananas), domestic livestock (cattle, pigs, and sheep), and, perhaps most significant, the horse, which gradually became central to the lives of many natives and transformed their societies. The exchange was at least as important (and more beneficial) to the Europeans. In both North and South America, the arriving white peoples learned from the natives new ­agricultural techniques appropriate to the demands of the new land. They discovered new crops—above all maize (corn), which Columbus took back to Europe from New World Crops his first trip to America. Such foods as squash, pumpkins, beans, sweet potatoes, tomatoes, peppers, and potatoes all found their way into European diets. In South America, Central America, and Mexico, Europeans and natives lived in intimate, if unequal, contact with one another. Many natives gradually came to speak Spanish or Portuguese, but they created a range of dialects fusing the European languages with elements of their own. European men outnumbered European women by at least ten to one. Intermarriage—often forcible—became frequent between Spanish immigrants and native women. Before long, the population of the colonies came to be dominated (numerically, at least) by people of mixed race, or mestizos. Virtually all the enterprises of the Spanish and Portuguese colonists depended on Indian workforces. In some places, Indians were sold into slavery. More often, Unfree Indian labor colonists used a coercive (or “indentured”) wage system, under which Indians worked in the mines and on the plantations under duress for fixed periods. That was not, in the end, enough to meet the labor needs of the colonists. As early as 1502, European settlers began importing slaves from Africa.

Africa and America
 Over one-half of all the immigrants to the New World between 1500 and 1800 were Africans, virtually all of them sent to the Americas against their will. Most came from a large region below the Sahara Desert, known as Guinea.

DEBATING THE PAST


Why Do Historians So
Often Differ?
 Early in the twentieth century, when the professional study of history was still ­relatively new, many historians believed that questions about the past could be ­answered with the same certainty and precision that questions in more-scientific fields could be answered. By sifting through available rec­ ords, using precise methods of research and analysis, and producing careful, closely argued accounts of the past, they believed they could create definitive histories that would survive without controversy. Scholars who adhered to this view believed that real knowledge can be derived only from direct, scientific observation of clear “fact.” They were known as “positivists.” A vigorous debate continues to this day over whether historical research can or should be truly objective. Almost no historian any longer accepts the positivist claim that history could ever be an exact science. Disagreement about the past is, in fact, at the heart of the effort to understand history. Critics of contemporary historical scholarship often denounce the way historians are constantly revising earlier interpretations. Some denounce the act of interpretation itself. History, they claim, is “what happened,” and historians should “stick to the facts.” Historians, however, continue to differ with one another both because the facts are seldom as straightforward as their critics claim and because facts by themselves mean almost nothing without an effort to assign meaning to them. Some historical facts, of course, are not in dispute. Everyone agrees, for example, that the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, and that 14 •

 Abraham Lincoln was elected president in 1860. But many other facts are much harder to ­determine—among them, for example, the question of how large the American population was before the arrival of Columbus, or how many slaves resisted slavery. This sounds like a reasonably straightforward question, but it is almost impossible to answer with any certainty—because the rec­ ords of slave resistance are spotty and the definition of “resistance” is a matter of considerable dispute. Even when a set of facts is clear and straightforward, historians disagree— sometimes quite radically—over what they mean. Those disagreements can be the result of political and ideological disagreements. Some of the most vigorous debates in recent decades have been between scholars who believe that economic interests and class divisions are the key to understanding the past, and those who believe that ideas and culture are at least as important as material interests. Whites and people of color, men and women, people from the American South and people from the North, young people and older people: these and many other points of difference find their way into scholarly disagreements. Debates can also occur over differences in methodology—between those who believe that quantitative studies can answer important historical questions and those who believe that other methods come closer to the truth. Most of all, historical interpretation changes in response to the time in which it is written. Historians may strive to be objective in their work, but no one can be entirely

 free from the assumptions and concerns of the present. In the 1950s, the omnipresent shadow of the Cold War had a profound ­effect on the way most historians viewed the past. In the 1960s, concerns about racial justice and disillusionment with the Vietnam War altered the way many historians viewed the past. Those events introduced a much more critical tone to scholarship and turned the attention of scholars away from politics and government and toward the study of society and culture. Many areas of scholarship in recent decades are embroiled in a profound debate over whether there is such a thing as “truth.” The world, some scholars argue, is simply a series of “narratives” constructed by people who view life in very different and often highly personal ways. Truth does not really exist. Everything is a product of interpretation. Not many historians embrace such radical ideas;

 most would agree that ­interpretations, to be of any value, must rest on a solid foundation of observable facts. But historians do ­recognize that even the most compelling facts are subject to many ­different interpretations and that the process of understanding the past is a forever continuing—and forever ­contested—process.

•


UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE
 1. What are some of the reasons

 ­historians so often disagree? 2. Is there ever a right or wrong in histori-

 cal interpretation? What value might historical inquiry have other than ­reaching a right or wrong conclusion? 3. If historians so often disagree, how should a student of history approach historical content? How might disagreement ­expand our understanding of ­history?

 Europeans and white Americans came to portray African society as primitive and uncivilized. But most Africans were, in fact, highly civilized peoples with well-developed economies and political systems. The residents of upper Guinea had substantial commercial contact with the Mediterranean world—trading ivory, gold, Trade States of West Africa and slaves for finished goods—and, largely as a result, became early converts to Islam. After the collapse of the ancient kingdom of Ghana around a.d. 1100, they created the even larger empire of Mali, whose trading center at Timbuktu became fabled as a center of education and a meeting place of the peoples of many lands. Farther south, Africans were more isolated from Europe and the Mediterranean and were more politically fragmented. The central social unit was the village, which usually consisted of members of an extended family group. Some groups of villages united in small kingdoms. But no large empires emerged in the south. Nevertheless, these southern societies developed extensive trade, both among themselves and, to a lesser degree, with the outside world. African civilizations developed economies that reflected the climates and resources of their lands. In upper Guinea, fishing and rice cultivation, supplemented by the extensive trade with Mediterranean lands, were the foundation of the economy. Farther south, Africans grew wheat and other food crops, raised livestock, and fished. There were some more-nomadic tribes in the interior, who subsisted largely on hunting and gathering. But most Africans were sedentary, farming people. As in many Indian societies in America, African families tended to be matrilineal: they traced their heredity through and inherited property from their m ­ others. Matrilineal Societies Women played a major role, often the dominant role, in trade. In many areas, they were the principal farmers (while the men hunted, fished, and raised livestock), and everywhere, • 15

AMERICA IN THE WORLD


The Atlantic Context of Early
American History
 Most Americans understand that our nation has recently become intimately bound up with the rest of the world—that we live in what some call the “age of globalization.” Until recently, however, most historians have examined the nation’s past in relative isolation. Among the first areas of American history to be reexamined in an international perspective is the earliest period of European settlement of the Americas. Many scholars of early American history now examine what happened in the “New World” in the context of what has become known as the “Atlantic World.” The idea of an Atlantic World rests in part on the obvious connections between western Europe and the Spanish, British, French, and Dutch colonies in North and South America. All the early European civilizations of the Americas were part of a great imperial project launched by the major powers of Europe. The massive European and African immigrations to the Americas beginning in the sixteenth century, the defeat and devastation of native populations, the creation of European agricultural and urban settlements, and the imposition of imperial regulations on trade, commerce, landowning, and political life—all of these forces reveal the influence of Old World ­imperialism on the history of the New World. But the expansion of empires is only one part of the creation of the Atlantic World. At least equally important—and closely related—is the expansion of commerce from Europe and Africa to the Americas. Although some Europeans traveled to the New World in search of religious freedom, or to escape oppression, or to search for adventure, the great majority of European 16 •

 immigrants were in search of economic opportunity. Not surprisingly, therefore, the European settlements in the Americas were almost from the start intimately connected to Europe through the growth of commerce between them—commerce that grew more extensive and more complex with every passing year. The commercial relationship between America and Europe was responsible not just for the growth of trade, but also for the increases in migration over time— as the demand for labor in the New World drew more and more settlers from the Old World. Commerce was also the principal reason for the rise of slavery in the Americas, and for the growth of the slave trade between European America and Africa. The Atlantic World, in other words, included not just Europe and the Americas, but Africa as well. Religion was another force binding together the Atlantic World. The vast majority of people of European descent were Christians, and most of them maintained important religious ties to part of a hierarchical church based in Rome with close ties with the Vatican. But the Protestant faiths that predominated in North America were intimately linked to their European counterparts as well. New religious ideas and movements spread back and forth across the Atlantic with astonishing speed. Great revivals that began in Europe moved quickly to America. The “Great Awakening” of the mid-eighteenth century, for example, began in Britain and traveled to America in large part through the efforts of the English evangelist George Whitefield. American evangelists later carried religious ideas from the New World back to the Old.

 The early history of European America was also closely bound up with the intellectual life of Europe. The Enlightenment—the cluster of ideas that emerged in Europe in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries emphasizing the power of human reason—moved quickly to the Americas, producing intellectual ferment throughout the New World, but particularly in the British colonies in North America (© Granger, NYC—All Rights Reserved.) and the Caribbean. The ideas of the the Atlantic World, connections that spread British philosopher John Locke, for example, artistic, scholarly, and political ideas widely helped shape the founding of Georgia. The through the lands bordering the ocean. English Constitution, and the idea of the Instead of thinking of the early history of “rights of Englishmen,” shaped the way North what became the United States simply as the Americans developed their own c­ oncepts of story of the growth of thirteen small colopolitics. Many of the ideas that u ­ nderlaid the nies along the Atlantic seaboard of North American Revolution were products of British America, the idea of the Atlantic World and continental ­philosophy that had traveled ­encourages us to think of early American across the Atlantic. The reinterpretation of history as a vast pattern of exchanges and those ideas by Americans to help justify their interactions—trade, migration, religious and drive to independence—by, among others, intellectual exchange, and many other Thomas Paine—moved back to Europe and ­relationships—among all the societies borhelped, among other things, to inspire the dering the Atlantic: w ­ estern Europe, western French Revolution. Scientific and technologi- Africa, the Caribbean, and North and South cal knowledge—­ another product of the America. Enlightenment—traveled constantly across the Atlantic and back. Americans borrowed industrial technology from Britain. Europe UNDERSTAND, ANALYZE, & EVALUATE acquired much of its early knowledge of electricity from experiments done in America. 1. What is the Atlantic World? But the Enlightenment was only one part of 2. What has led historians to begin studying the idea of an Atlantic World? the continuing ­intellectual ­connections within

•


 they managed child care and food preparation. Most tribes also divided political power by gender, with men choosing leaders to manage male affairs and women choosing parallel leaders to handle female matters. Small elites of priests and nobles stood at the top of many African societies. Most people belonged to a large middle group of farmers, traders, crafts workers, and others. At the bottom of society were slaves—men and women, not all of them African Slavery African, who were put into bondage after being captured in wars, because of criminal behavior, or as a result of unpaid debts. Slaves in Africa were generally in bondage for a fixed term, and in the meantime they retained certain legal protections (including the right to marry). Children did not inherit their parents’ condition of bondage. • 17

18 • CHAPTER 1


 The African slave trade long preceded European settlement in the New World. As early as the eighth century, west Africans began selling small numbers of slaves to traders from the Mediterranean and later to the Portuguese. In the sixteenth century, however, the Sugar and the Slave Trade market for slaves increased dramatically as a result of the growing European demand for sugarcane. The small areas of sugar cultivation in the Mediterranean could not meet the demand, and production soon spread to new areas: to the island of Madeira off the African coast, which became a Portuguese colony, and not long there­after (still in the sixteenth century) to the Caribbean islands and Brazil. Sugar was a laborintensive crop, and the demand for African workers in these new areas of cultivation was high. At first the slave traders were overwhelmingly Portuguese. By the seventeenth century, the Dutch had won control of most of the market. In the eighteenth century, the English dominated it. By 1700, slavery had spread well beyond its original locations in the Caribbean and South America and into the English colonies to the north. The relationship among European, African, and native peoples—however unequal—reminds us of the global context to the history of America. (See “America in the World: The Atlantic Context of Early American History.”)

THE ARRIVAL OF THE ENGLISH
 England’s first documented contact with the New World came only five years after Spain’s. In 1497, John Cabot (like Columbus, a native of Genoa) sailed to the northeastern coast of North America on an expedition sponsored by King Henry VII, in an unsuccessful search for a northwest passage through the New World to the Orient. But nearly a century passed before the English made any serious efforts to establish colonies in America.

Incentives for Colonization
 Interest in colonization grew in part as a response to social and economic problems in sixteenth-century England. The English people suffered from frequent and costly European wars, and they suffered from almost constant religious strife within their own land. Many suffered, too, from harsh economic changes in their countryside. Because the worldwide demand for wool was growing rapidly, landowners were converting their land from fields for crops to pastures for sheep. The result was a reduction in the amount of land available Scarce Land for growing food. England’s food supply declined at the same time that the English population was growing—from 3 million in 1485 to 4 million in 1603. To some of the English, the New World began to seem attractive because it offered something that was growing scarce in England: land. At the same time, new merchant capitalists were prospering by selling the products of England’s growing wool-cloth industry abroad. At first, most exporters did business almost entirely as individuals. In time, however, merchants formed companies, whose charters from the king gave them monopolies for trading in particular regions. Investors in these companies often made fantastic profits, and they were eager to expand their trade. Central to this trading drive was the emergence of a new concept of economic life Mercantilism known as mercantilism. Mercantilism rested on the belief that one person or nation could grow rich only at the expense of another, and that a nation’s economic health

THE COLLISION OF CULTURES
• 19 

 depended, therefore, on selling as much as possible to foreign lands and buying as little as possible from them. The principles of mercantilism spread throughout Europe in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. One result was the increased attractiveness of acquiring colonies, which became the source of raw materials and a market for the colonizing power’s goods. In England, the mercantilistic program thrived at first on the basis of the flourishing wool trade with the European continent, and particularly with the great cloth market in Antwerp. In the 1550s, however, that glutted market began to collapse, and English merchants had to look elsewhere for overseas trade. Some English believed colonies would solve their problems. There were also religious motives for colonization—a result of the Protestant Reformation. Protestantism began in Germany in 1517, when Martin Luther challenged some of the basic practices and beliefs of the Roman Catholic Religious Motives for Colonization Church. Luther quickly won a wide following among ordinary men and women in northern Europe. When the pope excommunicated him in 1520, Luther began leading his followers out of the Catholic Church entirely. The Swiss theologian John Calvin went even further in rejecting the Catholic belief that human behavior could affect an individual’s prospects for salvation. Calvin introduced the doctrine of predestination. God “elected” some people to be saved and condemned others to damnation; each person’s destiny was determined before birth, and no one could change that predetermined fate. But those who accepted Calvin’s teachings came to believe that the way they led their lives might reveal to them their chances of salvation. A wicked or useless existence would be a sign of damnation; saintliness, diligence, and success could be signs of grace. The new creed spread rapidly throughout northern Europe. In 1529, King Henry VIII of England, angered by the refusal of the pope to grant him a divorce from his Spanish wife, broke England’s ties with the Catholic Church and established himself as the head of the Christian faith in his country. This was known as the English Reformation. After Henry’s death, his Catholic daughter, Queen Mary, restored England’s allegiance to Rome and persecuted Protestants. But when Mary died in 1558, her half sister, Elizabeth I, became England’s sovereign and once again severed the nation’s connection with the Catholic Church, this time for good. To many English people, however, the new Church of England was not reformed enough. They clamored for reforms that would “purify” the church. As a result, they became known as Puritans. The most radical Puritans, known as Separatists, were determined to Puritans worship in their own independent congregations, despite English laws that required all subjects to attend regular Anglican services. Most Puritans did not wish to leave the Church of England. They wanted, rather, to simplify Anglican forms of worship and reform the leadership of the church. Like the Separatists, they grew increasingly frustrated by the refusal of political and ecclesiastical authorities to respond to their demands. Puritan discontent grew rapidly after the death of Elizabeth, the last of the Tudors, and the accession of James I, the first of the Stuarts, in 1603. Convinced that kings ruled by divine right, James quickly antagonized the Puritans by resorting to illegal and arbitrary taxation, favoring English Catholics in the granting of charters and other favors, and supporting “high-church” forms of ceremony. By the early seventeenth century, some religious nonconformists were beginning to look for places of refuge outside the kingdom. England’s first experience with colonization came not in the New World but in neighboring Ireland. The English had long laid claim to the island, but only in the late sixteenth

20 • CHAPTER 1


 century did serious efforts at colonization begin. The long, brutal process by which the English attempted to subdue the Irish created an important assumption about colonization: the belief that settlements in foreign lands must retain a rigid separation from the native populations. Unlike the Spanish in America, the English in Ireland tried to build a separate society of their own, peopled with emigrants from England itself. They would take that concept with them to the New World.

Irish Colonization


The French and the Dutch in America
 English settlers in North America encountered not only natives but also other Europeans who were, like them, driven by mercantilist ideas. There were scattered North American outposts of the Spanish Empire and, more important, there were French and Dutch settlers who were also vying for a stake in the New World. France founded its first permanent settlement in North America at Quebec in 1608, less than a year after the English started their first at Jamestown. The colony’s population grew slowly. Unlike the early English settlers, the French forged close ties with Native Americans deep inside the continent. French Jesuit missionaries established some of the first contacts between the two peoples. More important were the coureurs de bois—­ adventurous fur traders and trappers—who also penetrated far into the wilderness and developed an extensive trade that became one of the underpinnings of the French colonial French Traders and Jesuits in Canada economy. The French traders formed partnerships with the Indians. They often lived among the natives and married Indian women. The fur trade helped open the way for French agricultural estates (or seigneuries) along the St. Lawrence River and for the development of trade and military centers at Quebec and Montreal. The Dutch, too, established a presence in North America. Holland in the early seventeenth century was one of the leading nations of the world, and its commerce moved to America in the seventeenth century. In 1609, Henry Hudson, an English explorer in the employ of Dutch Claims the Dutch, sailed up the river that was to be named for him in what was then New Netherland. His explorations led to a Dutch claim on the territory. The Dutch built a town on Manhattan Island named New Amsterdam. From it, Dutch trappers moved into the interior toward the Appalachian Mountains and built a profitable trade in furs.

The First English Settlements
 The first permanent English settlement in the New World was established at Jamestown, in Virginia, in 1607. But for nearly thirty years before that, English merchants and adventurers had been engaged in a series of failed efforts to create colonies in America. Through much of the sixteenth century, the English had harbored mixed feelings about the New World. They were intrigued by its possibilities, but they were also fearful of English Naval Power Spain, which remained the dominant force in America. In 1588, however, King Philip II of Spain sent one of the largest military fleets in the history of ­warfare—the Spanish Armada—across the English Channel to attack England itself. The smaller English fleet, taking advantage of its greater maneuverability, defeated the armada and, in a single stroke, ended Spain’s domination of the Atlantic. This great shift in naval power caused English interest in colonizing the New World to grow quickly. The pioneers of English colonization were Sir Humphrey Gilbert and his half brother Sir Walter Raleigh—both veterans of earlier colonial efforts in Ireland. In 1578, Gilbert Gilbert and Raleigh obtained from Queen Elizabeth a six-year patent granting him the

THE COLLISION OF CULTURES
• 21 

 A drawing by one of the colonists in the ill-fated Roanoke expedition of 1585 became the basis for this engraving by Theodor de Bry, published in England in 1590. A small European ship approaches the island of Roanoke, at left. The wreckage of several larger vessels farther out to sea and the presence of Indian settlements on the mainland and on Roanoke itself suggest some of the perils the settlers encountered. (© The Gallery Collection/Corbis) ROANOKE

 e­ xclusive right “to inhabit and possess any remote and heathen lands not already in the possession of any Christian prince.” Five years later, after several setbacks, he led an expedition to Newfoundland, looking for a good place to build a profitable colony. But a storm sank his ship, and he was lost at sea. The next year, Sir Walter Raleigh secured his own six-year grant from the queen and sent a small group of men on an expedition to explore the North American coast. When they returned, Raleigh named the region they had explored Virginia, in honor of Elizabeth, who was known as the “Virgin Queen.” In 1585, Raleigh recruited his cousin, Sir Richard Grenville, to lead a group of men to the island of Roanoke, off the coast of what is now North Carolina, to establish a colony. Grenville deposited the settlers on the island, destroyed an Indian village as retaliation for a minor theft, and returned to England. The following spring, with long-overdue supplies and reinforcements from England, Sir Francis Drake unexpectedly arrived in Roanoke. The dispirited colonists boarded his ships and left. Raleigh tried again in 1587, sending an expedition to Roanoke carrying ninety-one men, seventeen women, and nine children. The settlers attempted to take up where the first group of colonists had left off. John White, the commander of the expedition, returned to England after several weeks, in search of supplies and additional settlers. Because of a war with Spain, he was unable to return to Roanoke for three Failed Colony of Roanoke years. When he did, in 1590, he found the island deserted, with no clue to the fate of the settlers other than the cryptic inscription “Croatoan” carved on a post.

22 • CHAPTER 1


 The Roanoke disaster marked the end of Sir Walter Raleigh’s involvement in English colonization of the New World. No later colonizers would receive grants of land in America as vast or undefined as those Raleigh and Gilbert had acquired. Yet the colonizing impulse remained very much alive. In the early years of the seventeenth century, a group of London merchants decided to renew the attempt at colonization in Virginia. A rival group of merchants, from the area around Plymouth, was also interested in American ventures and was sponsoring voyages of exploration farther north. In 1606, James I issued a new charter, which divided North America between the two groups. The London group got the exclusive right to colonize the south, and the Plymouth merchants received the same right in the north. Through the efforts of these and other companies, the first enduring English colonies would soon be established in North America.

CONCLUSION
 The lands that Europeans eventually named the Americas were the home of many millions of people before the arrival of Columbus. Having migrated from Asia thousands of years earlier, the pre-Columbian Americans spread throughout the Western Hemisphere and eventually created great civilizations. Among the most notable of them were the Incas in Peru and the Mayas and Aztecs in Mexico. In the regions north of what was later named the Rio Grande, the human population was smaller and the civilizations were less advanced than they were farther south. Even so, North American natives created a cluster of civilizations that thrived and expanded. In the century after European contact, these native populations suffered catastrophes that all but destroyed the civilizations they had built: brutal invasions by Spanish and Portuguese conquistadores and a series of plagues inadvertently imported by Europeans. By the middle of the sixteenth century, the Spanish and Portuguese—no longer faced with effective resistance from the native populations—had established colonial control over all of South America and much of North America. In the parts of North America that would eventually become the United States, the European presence was for a time much less powerful. The Spanish established an important northern outpost in what is now New Mexico, a society in which Europeans and Indians lived together intimately, if unequally. On the whole, however, the North American Indians remained largely undisturbed by Europeans until English, French, and Dutch migrations began in the early seventeenth century.

KEY TERMS/PEOPLE/PLACES/EVENTS
 Archaic period 3 Atlantic World 16 Bartolomé de Las Casas 11 Cahokia 5 charter 18 Christopher Columbus 7 Clovis people 2

 colonization 18 colony 7 conquistadores 9 Elizabeth I 19 encomienda 12 globalization 16 imperialism 16

 mercantilism 18 Mesoamerica 4 mestizos 13 Popé 12 Protestant Reformation 19 Puritans 19 Roanoke 21

THE COLLISION OF CULTURES
• 23 

RECALL AND REFLECT
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.


 Why were agricultural societies of the Northeast more nomadic than those of other regions? What factors favored the Spanish in their conquest of native peoples? How did French settlement in America differ from that of the Spanish? What role did Africa play in the creation of an Atlantic World? How did the English experience at colonization in Ireland affect English colonization in America?



TRANSPLANTATIONS
AND BORDERLANDS
THE EARLY CHESAPEAKE
THE GROWTH OF NEW ENGLAND
THE RESTORATION COLONIES
BORDERLANDS AND MIDDLE GROUNDS
THE DEVELOPMENT OF EMPIRE


LOOKING AHEAD
 1. How did the English colonies in the Chesapeake, New England, and mid-Atlantic differ from one another in purpose and administration? 2. How “English” were the colonies in the decades after the British settlements? 3. What did the English want from the colonies in the first century of English settlement in North America?

THE FIRST PERMANENT ENGLISH SETTLEMENTS
were small, fragile communities, generally unprepared for the hardships they were to face. Seeking to improve their futures and secure a greater degree of control over their lives, the European immigrants found a world populated by Native American tribes; by colonists, explorers, and traders from Spain, France, and the Netherlands; and by immigrants from other parts of Europe and, soon, Africa. American society was from the beginning a fusion of many cultures in which disparate people and cultures coexisted often violently. All of British North America was, in effect, a borderland during the early years of colonization. Through much of the seventeenth century, European colonies both relied on and did battle with the Indian tribes and struggled with challenges from other Europeans in their midst. Eventually, however, some areas of English settlement—most notably the growing communities along the eastern seaboard—managed to dominate their own regions, marginalizing or expelling Indians and other challengers. In these eastern colonies, the English created significant towns and cities; built political, religious, and educational institutions; and created agricultural systems of great productivity. They also developed substantial differences from one another—perhaps most notably in the growth of a slavedriven agricultural economy in the South, which had few counterparts in the North. 
24 •


THE EARLY
CHESAPEAKE
 Once James I had issued his 1606 charters, the London Company moved quickly and decisively to launch a colonizing expedition headed for Virginia—a party of 144 men aboard three ships, the Godspeed, the Discovery, and the Susan Constant, which set sail for America in 1607.

Colonists and Natives
 Only 104 men survived the journey. They reached the American coast in the spring of 1607, sailed into the Chesapeake and up a river they named the James, in honor of their king. They established their colony, Jamestown, on a peninsula on the river. They chose an inland setting because they believed it would provide a measure of comfort and security. The Jamestown settlers faced ordeals that were to a large degree of their own making. They were vulnerable to local d­ iseases, particularly malaria, which was especially virulent along the marshy rivers they had chosen to settle. They spent more time searching for gold and other exports than growing enough food to be self-sufficient. And they could create no real community without women, who had not been recruited for the expedition. The survival of the colonies required European immigrants to learn from local Indian tribes. This was not easy for the settlers to accept, because they believed that English civilization, with its oceangoing vessels, muskets, and other advanced weaponry, was greatly superior. Yet native agricultural techniques were far better adapted to the soil and climate of Virginia than those of English origin. The local natives were settled farmers whose villages were surrounded by neatly ordered fields. They grew a variety of crops— beans, pumpkins, vegetables, and above all maize (corn). Some of the Indian farmlands stretched over hundreds of acres and supported substantial populations.

TIME LINE


Jamestown
 founded

 First African slaves in Virginia Virginia House of Burgesses meets

 Powhatan Indians attack Virginia

 Puritans establish Massachusetts Bay colony Roger Williams founds Rhode Island

 Pilgrims found Plymouth Colony

 Dutch settle Manhattan

 Maryland founded

 Anne Hutchinson expelled from Massachusetts Bay colony



Pequot War


 Carolina chartered

 King Philip’s War

 English capture New Netherland Bacon’s Rebellion

 Pennsylvania chartered



Dominion of New
England


Glorious Revolution
 Georgia chartered

• 25


