Chapter 22 The Progressive Era


Muckrakers Call for Reform
 In 1902, Samuel S. McClure, the shrewd owner of McClure’s Magazine, sensed something astir in the country that his reporters were not covering. Like Life, Munsey’s, the Ladies’ Home Journal, and Cosmopolitan, McClure’s was reaching more and more people—more than a quarter million readers a month. Americans were snapping up the new popular magazines filled with eye-catching illustrations and up-to-date fiction. Advances in photoengraving during the 1890s dramatically reduced the cost of illustrations; at the same time, income from advertisements rose sharply. By the turn of the century, some magazines earned as much as $60,000 an issue from advertising alone, and publishers could price them as low as 10 cents a copy. McClure was always chasing new ideas and readers, and in 1902, certain that something was happening in the public mood, he told one of his editors, 36-year-old Lincoln Steffens, a former Wall Street reporter, to find out what it was. “Get out of here, travel, go—somewhere,” he said to Steffens. “Buy a railroad ticket, get on a train, and there, where it lands you, there you will learn to edit a magazine.” McClure’s, it turned out, had an unpaid bill from the Lackawanna Railroad, and Steffens traveled west. In St. Louis, he came across a young district attorney named Joseph W. Folk who had found a trail of corruption

 linking politics and some of the city’s respected business leaders. Eager for help, Folk did not mind naming names to the visiting editor from New York. “It is good business men that are corrupting our bad politicians,” he emphasized again and again. “It is the leading citizens that are battening on our city.” Steffens’s story, “Tweed Days in St. Louis,” appeared in the October 1902 issue of McClure’s. The November McClure’s carried the first installment of Ida Tarbell’s scathing “History of the Standard Oil Company,” and in January 1903, Steffens was back with “The Shame of Minneapolis,” another tale of corrupt partnership between business and politics. McClure had what he wanted, and in the January issue he printed an editorial, “Concerning Three Articles in This Number of McClure’s , and a Coincidence That May Set Us Thinking.” Steffens on Minneapolis, Tarbell on Standard Oil, and an article on abuses in labor unions—all, McClure said, on different topics but actually on the same theme: corruption in American life. “Capitalists, workingmen, politicians, citizens— all breaking the law, or letting it be broken.” Readers were enthralled, and articles and books by other muckrakers—Theodore Roosevelt coined the term in 1906 to describe the writers who made a practice of exposing the corruption of public and

 s McClure had hoped, Steffens had found something astir in the country, something so important and pervasive that it altered the course of American history in the twentieth century. The muckrakers were a journalistic voice of this larger movement in American society. Called progressivism, it lasted from the mid-1890s through World War I. Like muckraking itself, progressivism reflected worry about the state of society, the effects of industrialization and urbanization, social disorder, political corruption, and a host of other issues. With concerns so large, progressivism often had a sense of crisis and urgency, although it was rooted in a spirit of hopefulness and confidence in human progress. For varying reasons, thousands of people became concerned about their society, and, separately and together, they set out to cure some of the ills they saw around them. The efforts of the so-called progressives changed the nation and gave the era its name.

A


The Changing Face
 of Industrialism How did industrialism change after 1900?

 At the beginning of the twentieth century, magazines enjoyed increasing popularity. McClure’s Magazine pioneered investigative journalism. The November 1902 edition featured the first installment of Ida Tarbell’s two-year series on Standard Oil that exposed the corrupt practices and deals that had helped create the company.

 prominent figures—spread swiftly. Collier’s had articles on questionable stock market practices, patent medicines, and the beef trust. Novelist Upton Sinclair tackled the meatpackers in The Jungle (1906). In 1904, Steffens collected his McClure’s articles in The Shame of the Cities, with an introduction expressing confidence that reform was possible, “that our shamelessness is superficial, that beneath it lies a pride which, being real, may save us yet.” Muckraking flourished from 1903 to 1909, and while it did, good writers and bad investigated almost every corner of American life: government, labor unions, big business, Wall Street, health care, the food industry, child labor, women’s rights, prostitution, ghetto living, and life insurance.

 “Life in the States,” an English visitor said in 1900, “is one perpetual whirl of telephones, telegrams, phonographs, electric bells, motors, lifts, and automatic instruments.” If not quite as automated as the visitor described, conditions in America were better than just a few years before. Farms and factories were once again prosperous; in 1901, for the first time in years, the economy reached full capacity. Farm prices rose almost 50 percent between 1900 and 1910. Unemployment dropped. “In the United States of today,” a Boston newspaper said in 1904, “everyone is middle class. The resort to force, the wild talk of the nineties are over. Everyone is busily, happily getting ahead.” Everyone, of course, was not middle class, nor was everyone getting ahead. “Wild talk” persisted. Many of the problems that had angered people in the 1890s continued into the new century, and millions of Americans still suffered from poverty and disease. Racism sat even more heavily on African Americans in both South and North, and there was increasing hostility against immigrants from southern and eastern Europe and from Mexico and Asia. Yet to some degree the Boston newspaper was right: Economic conditions were better for many people, and as a result, prosperity became one of the keys to understanding the era and the nature of progressive reform. The start of the new century was another key as well, for it influenced people to take a fresh look at themselves and their times. Excited about beginning the twentieth century, people believed technology and enterprise would shape a better life. Savoring the word new, they talked of the new poetry, new cinema, new history, new democracy, new woman, new art, new immigration, new morality, and new city. Magazines picked up the word; there were the New Republic and the New Statesman. Presidents Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson called their political programs the New Nationalism and the New Freedom. The word mass also cropped up frequently. Victors in the recent war with Spain, Americans took pride in teeming cities, burgeoning corporations, and other marks of the mass society. They enjoyed the fruits of mass production, read mass circulation newspapers



 CHAPTER 22

THE PROGRESSIVE ERA

 and magazines, and took mass transit from the growing spiral of suburbs into the central cities. Behind mass production lay significant changes in the nation’s industrial system. Businesses grew at a rapid rate. They were large in the three decades after the Civil War, but in the years between 1895 and 1915, industries became mammoth, employing thousands of workers and equipped with assembly lines to turn out huge quantities of the company’s product. Inevitably, changes in management attitudes, business organization, and worker roles influenced the entire society. Inevitably, too, the growth of giant businesses gave rise to a widespread fear of “trusts” and a desire among many progressive reformers to break them up or regulate them.

The Innovative Model T
 In the movement toward large-scale business and mass production, the automobile industry was one of those that led the way. In 1895, there were only four cars on the nation’s roads; in 1917, there were

Watch the Video


 nearly five million, and the automobile had already helped work a small revolution in industrial methods and social mores. Mass production of automobiles began in the first years of the century. Using an assembly-line system that foreshadowed later techniques, Ransom E. Olds turned out five thousand Olds runabouts in 1904. But Olds’s days of leadership were numbered. In 1903, Henry Ford and a small group of associates formed the Ford Motor Company, the firm that transformed the business. Ford was forty years old. He had tried farming and hated it. During the 1890s, he worked as an engineer for Detroit’s Edison Company but spent his spare time designing internal combustion engines and automobiles. At first, like many others in the industry, he concentrated on building luxury and racing cars. Racing his own cars, Ford became the “speed demon” of Detroit; in 1904, he set the world’s land speed record—more than ninety miles per hour—in the 999, a large red racer that shot flames from the motor. In 1903, Ford sold the first Ford car. The price was high, and in 1905, Ford raised prices still higher. Sales plummeted. In 1907,

The Rise and Fall of the Automobile Economy


 The twentieth century was the century of the expansive automobile industry. It remade American culture. In the Model T Era of 1908 to 1927, automobiles transitioned from being toys to being household necessities.

The Changing Face of Industrialism


 he lowered the price; sales and revenues rose. Ford learned an important lesson of the modern economy: A smaller unit profit on a large number of sales meant enormous revenues. Early in 1908, he introduced the Model T, a four-cylinder, 20-horsepower “Tin Lizzie,” costing $850, and available only in black. Eleven thousand were sold the first year. “I am going to democratize the automobile,” Ford proclaimed. “When I’m through everybody will be able to afford one, and about everyone will have one.” The key was mass production, and after many experiments, Ford copied the techniques of meatpackers who moved animal carcasses along overhead trolleys from station to station. Adapting the process to automobile assembly, Ford in 1913 set up moving assembly lines in his plant in Highland Park, Michigan, that dramatically reduced the time and cost of producing cars. Emphasizing continuous movement, he strove for a nonstop flow from raw material to finished product. In 1914, he sold 248,000 Model T cars. That year, Ford workers assembled a car in ninety-three minutes, one-tenth the time it had taken just eight months before. On a single day in 1925, Ford set a record by turning out 9109 Model Ts, a new car for every ten seconds of the workday. While Ford was putting more and more cars on the road, the 1916 Federal Aid Roads Act, a little noticed measure, set the framework for road building in the twentieth century. Removing control from county governments, it required every state desiring federal funds to establish a highway department to plan routes, oversee construction, and maintain roads. In states that had such departments, the federal government paid half the cost of building the roads. Providing for a planned highway system, the act produced a national network of two-lane all-weather intercity roads.

The Burgeoning Trusts
 As businesses like Ford’s grew, capital and organization became increasingly important, and the result was the formation of a growing number of trusts. Standard Oil started the trend in 1882, but the greatest momentum came two decades later. Between 1898 and 1903, a series of mergers and consolidations swept the economy. Many smaller firms disappeared, swallowed up in giant corporations. By 1904, large-scale combinations of one form or another controlled nearly two-fifths of the capital in manufacturing in the country. The result was not monopoly but oligopoly—control of a commodity or service by a small number of large, powerful companies. Six great financial groups dominated the railroad industry; a handful of holding companies controlled utilities and steel. Rockefeller’s Standard Oil owned about 85 percent of the oil business. Large companies such as Standard Oil and American Tobacco had weathered the depression of the 1890s, and after 1898, financiers and industrialists followed their example and formed the Amalgamated Copper Company, Consolidated Tobacco, U.S. Rubber, and a host of others. By 1909, just 1 percent of the industrial firms were producing nearly half of all manufactured goods. Giant businesses reached abroad for raw materials and new markets. United Fruit, an empire of plantations and steamships in the Caribbean, exploited opportunities created by victory in the war with Spain. U.S. Steel worked with overseas companies to fix the price of steel rails, an unattainable



BUSINESS CONSOLIDATIONS (MERGERS), 1895–1905



1896 1897 1898 1899 1900 1901 1902 1903 1904




 dream just a few years before. For decades, competition had sent rail prices up and down; now they stayed at $28 a ton, and through the famous “Gary dinners” in which Elbert H. Gary of U.S. Steel brought steel executives from “competing” firms together to set prices, market conditions were fixed for wide areas of the industry. Though the trend has been overstated, finance capitalists such as J. P. Morgan tended to replace the industrial capitalists of an earlier era. Able to finance the mergers and reorganizations, investment bankers played a greater and greater role in the economy. A multibillion-dollar financial house, J. P. Morgan and Company operated a network of control that ran from New York City to every industrial and financial center in the nation. Like other investment firms, it held directorships in many corporations, creating “interlocking directorates” that allowed it to control many businesses. In 1913, two banking groups—Morgan’s and Rockefeller’s—held 341 directorships in 112 corporations with an aggregate capital of more than $22 billion. Massive business growth set off a decade-long debate over what government should do about the trusts. Some critics who believed that the giant companies were responsible for stifling individual opportunity and raising prices wanted to break them up into small competitive units. Others argued that large-scale business was a mark of the times, and that it produced more goods and better lives. The debate over the trusts was one of the issues that shaped the Progressive Era, but it was never a simple contest between high-minded reformers and greedy business titans. Some progressives favored big business; others wanted it broken up. Business leaders themselves were divided in their viewpoints, and some welcomed reform-led assaults on giant competitors. As a rule, both progressives and business leaders drew on similar visions of the country: complex, expansive, hopeful, managerially minded,



 CHAPTER 22

THE PROGRESSIVE ERA

 and oriented toward results and efficiency. They both believed in private property and the importance of economic progress. In fact, in working for reform, the progressives often drew on the managerial methods of a business world they sought to regulate.

Managing the Machines
 Mass production changed the direction of American industry. Size, system, organization, and marketing became increasingly important. Management focused on speed and product, not on workers. Assembly-line technology changed tasks and, to some extent, values. The goal was no longer to make a unique product that would be better than the one before. “The way to make automobiles,” Ford said as early as 1903, “is to make one automobile like another automobile, to make them all alike, to make them come through the factory just alike.”

Read the Document


Frederick Winslow Taylor,
Scientific Management (1911)


 In 1911, Frederick Winslow Taylor published his book The Principles of Scientific Management. In this work, Taylor proposed two major reforms. First, management must take responsibility for job-related knowledge and classify it into rules. Second, management should control the workplace through standardization of methods.

 In a development that rivaled assembly lines in importance, businesses established industrial research laboratories where scientists and engineers developed new products. General Electric founded the first one in 1900, housed in a barn. It soon attracted experts who designed improvements in light bulbs, invented the cathode-ray tube, worked on early radio, and even tinkered with atomic theory. Du Pont opened its labs in 1911, Eastman Kodak in 1912, and Standard Oil in 1919. As the source of new ideas and technology, the labs altered life in the twentieth century. Through all this, business became large-scale, mechanized, and managed. While many shops still employed fewer than a dozen workers, the proportion of such shops shrank. By 1920, close to one-half of all industrial workers toiled in factories employing more than 250 people. More than one-third worked in factories that were part of multiplant companies. Industries that processed materials—iron and steel, paper, cement, and chemicals—were increasingly automated and operated continuously. In the glass industry, machines ended the domination of highly skilled and well-paid craftspeople. In 1908, Irving W. Colburn invented a machine to manufacture plate glass; the Libbey-Owens-Ford Company bought the patent; and Ford soon had a glassmaking machine from which emerged every day for two years a 3½-mile ribbon of automobile window glass. Eventually, the plant produced almost two thousand miles of glass. Workers tending such ribbons could not fall behind. Foremen still managed the laborers on the factory floor, but more and more, the rules came down from a central office where trained professional managers supervised production flow. Systematic record keeping, cost accounting, and inventory and production controls became widespread. Workers lost control of the work pace. “If you need to turn out a little more,” a manager at Swift and Company said, “you speed up the conveyor a little and the men speed up to keep pace.” It worked. For that and other reasons, in the automobile industry, output per worker-hour multiplied an extraordinary four times between 1909 and 1919. Folkways of the workplace—workers passing job-related knowledge to each other, performing their tasks with little supervision, setting their own pace, and in effect running the shop—began to give way to “scientific” labor management. More than anyone else, Frederick Winslow Taylor, an inventive mechanical engineer, strove to extract maximum efficiency from each worker. “In the past,” he believed, “the man has been first; in the future the system must be first.” In his book The Principles of Scientific Management (1911), Taylor proposed two major reforms. First, management must take responsibility for job-related knowledge and classify it into “rules, laws, and formulae.” Second, management should control the workplace “through enforced standardization of methods, enforced adoption of the best implements and working conditions, and enforced cooperation.” Although few factories wholly adopted Taylor’s principles, he had great influence, and the doctrines of scientific management spread through American industry. Workers caught up in the changing industrial system experienced the benefits of efficiency and productivity; in some industries, they earned more. But they suffered important losses as well.

 Society’s Masses

 Performing repetitive tasks, they seemed part of the machinery, moving to the pace and needs of their mechanical pacesetters. Bored, they might easily lose pride of workmanship, though many workers, it is clear, did not. Efficiency engineers experimented with tools and methods, a process many workers found unsettling. Yet the goal was to establish routine—to work out, as someone said of a garment worker, “one single precise motion each second, 3,600 in one hour, and all exactly the same.” Praising that worker, the manager said, “She is a sure machine.” Jobs became not only monotonous but dangerous. As machines and assembly lines sped up, boredom or miscalculation could bring disaster. Meat cutters sliced fingers and hands. Illinois steel mills, a magazine said, were “Making Steel and Killing Men”; one mill had forty-six deaths in 1906 alone. Injuries were part of many jobs. “The machines go like mad all day,” a garment worker said, “because the faster you work the more money you get. Sometimes in my haste I get my finger caught and the needle goes right through it . . . I bind the finger up with a piece of cotton and go on working.”

Watch the Video




Rural Free Delivery Mail


 Society’s Masses How did mass production affect women, children, immigrants, and African Americans? Spreading consumer goods through society, mass production not only improved people’s lives but sometimes cost lives, too. Tending the machines took hard, painful labor, often under dangerous conditions. As businesses expanded, they required more and more people, and the labor force increased tremendously to keep up with the demand for workers in the factories, mines, and forests. Women, African Americans, Asian Americans, and Mexican Americans played larger and larger roles. Immigration soared. Between 1901 and 1910, nearly 8.8 million immigrants entered the United States; between 1911 and 1920, another 5.7 million came. For many of these people, life was harsh, spent in crowded slums and long hours on the job. Fortunately, the massive unemployment of the 1890s was over, and in many skilled trades, such as cigar making, there was plenty of work to go around. Though the economic recovery helped nearly everyone, the less skilled continued to be the less fortunate. Migrant workers, lumberjacks, ore shovelers, and others struggled to find jobs that paid decently. Under such circumstances, many people fought to make a living, and many, too, fought to improve their lot. Their efforts, along with the efforts of the reform-minded people who came to their aid, became another important hallmark of the Progressive Era.

Better Times on the Farm
 While people continued to flee the farms—by 1920, fewer than one-third of all Americans lived on farms, and fewer than one-half lived in rural areas—farmers themselves prospered, the beneficiaries of greater production and expanding urban markets. Rural free delivery, begun in 1896, helped diminish the farmers’ sense of isolation and changed farm life. The delivery

 The West Virginia experiment with rural free delivery was launched in relative obscurity and in an atmosphere of hostility. Critics of the plan claimed it was impractical and too expensive to have a postal carrier trudge over rutted roads and through forests trying to deliver mail in all kinds of weather.

 of mail to the farm door opened that door to a wider world; it exposed farmers to urban thinking, national advertising, and political events. In 1911, more than one billion newspapers and magazines were delivered over RFD routes. Parcel post (1913) permitted the sending of packages through the U.S. mail. Mail-order houses flourished; rural merchants suffered. Packages went both ways—President Woodrow Wilson’s first parcel-post delivery held 8 pounds of New Jersey apples—and within a year, 300 million packages were being mailed annually. While telephones and electricity did not reach most rural areas for decades, better roads, mail-order catalogs, and other innovations knit farmers into the larger society. Early in the new century, Mary E. Lease—who in her Populist days had urged Kansas farmers to raise less corn and more hell— moved to Brooklyn. Farmers still had problems. Land prices rose with crop prices, and farm tenancy increased, especially in the South. Tenancy grew from one-quarter of all farms in 1880 to more than one-third in 1910. In South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi, nearly two-thirds of the farms were run by tenant farmers. Many southern tenant farmers were African Americans, and they suffered from farm-bred diseases. In one of the reforms of the Progressive Era, in 1909, the Rockefeller Sanitary Commission, acting on recent scientific discoveries, began a sanitation campaign that eventually wiped out the hookworm disease, and in 1912, the U.S. Public Health Service began work on rural malaria. In the arid West, irrigation transformed the land as the federal government and private landholders joined to import water from mountain watersheds. The dry lands bloomed, and so did a rural



 CHAPTER 22

THE PROGRESSIVE ERA

Read the Document


Gifford Pinchot, The Fight
 for Conservation (1910)

Co
 lum

 bia

R.


 CANADA ssouri R . Mi

 WASHINGTON

NORTH DAKOTA

R


 MONTANA

 India called picking asparagus a “ghastly” job, paid at the rate of ten cents a box: They gave us miles and miles of asparagus rows. As soon as I had knelt down with my knife and cut out one head and put it in the box, there would be another one sprouting before me. Then I would have to stoop again, and it was continuous picking and stooping that made it a terrible form of exercise. It is walk and bend, bend and walk, from half past four [in the morning] or thereabouts, until seven in the evening.

O


C


K


 OREGON

SOUTH DAKOTA

Y


IDAHO
Sn ake R. 
 WYOMING

M


S.
T N


 SIERR

 UTAH

 d ra lo Co

R


 NEBRASKA

.


A
AD EV AN

 CALIFORNIA

 NEVADA

 o

 COLORADO

 KANSAS

 OKLAHOMA

 ARIZONA

PACIFIC OCEAN

NEW MEXICO

 TEXAS

 o

Ri


 and Gr

 e





 400 miles

 MEXICO



 400 kilometers

 Irrigation projects Reservoirs and lakes used as reservoirs Federal land reserves

IRRIGATION AND CONSERVATION IN THE WEST TO 1917
To make the arid lands of the western states productive, the state and federal governments regulated the water supply through irrigation projects and the creation of water reservoirs. The federal government also created land reserves. 
 class structure that sharply separated owners from workers. Under the Newlands Act of 1902, the secretary of the interior formed the U.S. Reclamation Service, which gathered a staff of thousands of engineers and technicians, “the largest bureaucracy ever assembled in irrigation history.” Dams and canals channeled water into places such as California’s Imperial Valley, and as the water streamed in, cotton, cantaloupes, oranges, tomatoes, lettuce, and a host of other crops streamed out to national markets. By 1920, Idaho, Montana, Utah, Wyoming, Colorado, and Oregon had extensive irrigation systems, all drawing on scarce water supplies; California, the foremost importer of water, had 4.2 million acres under irrigation, many of them picked by migrant workers from Mexico, China, and Japan. The work was backbreaking—and poorly paid. A worker from

Women and Children at Work
 Women worked in larger and larger numbers. In 1900, more than five million worked—one-fift h of all adult women—and among those aged fourteen to twenty-four, the employment rate was almost one-third. Of those employed, single women outnumbered married women by seven to one, yet more than one-third of married women worked. Most women held service jobs. Only a small number held higher-paying jobs as professionals or managers. In the 1890s, women made up more than one-quarter of medical school graduates. Using a variety of techniques, men gradually squeezed them out, and by the 1920s, only about 5 percent of the graduates were women. Few women taught in colleges and universities, and those who did were expected to resign if they married. In 1906, Harriet Brooks, a promising physicist at Barnard College in New York, became engaged and refused to resign; the dean told her icily that Barnard expected a married woman to “dignify her home-making into a profession, and not assume that she can carry on two full professions at a time.” More women than men graduated from high school, and with such professions as medicine and science largely closed to them, women often turned to the new “business schools” that offered training in stenography, typing, and bookkeeping. In 1920, more than one-quarter of all employed women held clerical jobs. Many others taught school. In 1907 and 1908, investigators studied twenty-two thousand women workers in Pittsburgh; 60 percent of them earned less than $7 a week, a minimum for “decent living.” Fewer than 1 percent held skilled jobs; most tended machines, wrapped and labeled, or did handwork that required no particular skill. In New York, many women toiled six days a week as garment workers from eight in the morning to six in the evening, with an extra hour off on Saturdays. They earned $7 to $12 a week, nothing at all during slack season. They had to buy their own needles and thread and pay for electricity and chairs to sit on. Black women had always worked, and in far larger numbers than their white counterparts. The reason was usually economic; an African American man or woman alone could rarely earn enough to support a family. Unlike many white women, black women tended to remain in the labor force after marriage or the start of a family. They also had less opportunity for job advancement, and in 1920, between one-third and one-half of all African American women who were working were restricted to personal and domestic service jobs.

 Society’s Masses

Read the Document


 John Spargo, from The Bitter Cry of the Children (1906)



 spurred by the data, the Children’s Bureau was formed within the U.S. Bureau of Labor, with Grace Abbott, a social worker, at its head. It immediately began its own investigations, showing among other things the need for greater protection of maternal and infant health. In 1921, Congress passed the Sheppard-Towner Maternity and Infancy Protection Act, which helped fund maternity and pediatric clinics. Providing a precedent for the Social Security Act of 1935, it demonstrated the increasing effectiveness of women reformers in the Progressive Era. Numerous middle-class women became involved in the fight for reform, while many others, reflecting the ongoing changes in the family, took increasing pride in homemaking and motherhood. Mother’s Day, the national holiday, was formally established in 1913. Women who preferred smaller numbers of children turned increasingly to birth control, which became a more acceptable practice. Margaret Sanger, a nurse and outspoken social reformer, led a campaign to give physicians broad discretion in prescribing contraceptives. When Sanger became involved in the birth control movement, the federal Comstock Law banned the interstate transport of contraceptive devices and information.

 The Niagara Movement and the NAACP

 Breaker boys, who picked out pieces of slate from the coal as it rushed past, often became bent-backed and suffered respiratory diseases such as bronchitis and tuberculosis after years of working fourteen hours a day in the coal mines. Accidents—and deaths—were common in the mines.

 Critics charged that women’s employment endangered the home, threatened their reproductive functions, and even, as one man said, stripped them of “that modest demeanor that lends a charm to their kind.” Adding to these fears, the birthrate continued to drop between 1900 and 1920, and the divorce rate soared, in part because working-class men took advantage of the newer moral freedom and deserted their families in growing numbers. By 1916, there was one divorce for every nine marriages as compared to one for twenty-one in 1880. Many children also worked. In 1900, about three million children—nearly 20 percent of those between the ages of 5 and 15—held full-time or almost full-time jobs. Twenty-five thousand boys under 16 worked in mining; twenty thousand children under 12, mainly girls, worked in southern cotton mills. Gradually, as public indignation grew, the use of child labor shrank. Determined to do something about the situation, the Women’s Trade Union League lobbied the federal Bureau of Labor to investigate the conditions under which women and children worked. Begun in 1907, the investigation took four years and produced nineteen volumes of data, some of it shocking, all of it factual. In 1911,

 At the turn of the century, eight of every ten African Americans still lived in rural areas, mainly in the South. Most were poor sharecroppers. Jim Crow laws segregated many schools, railroad cars, hotels, and hospitals. Poll taxes and other devices disfranchised blacks and many poor whites. Violence was common; from 1900 to 1914, white mobs murdered more than a thousand black people. Two murders occurred near Vicksburg, Mississippi, in 1904, and they revealed a great deal about the kind of violence African Americans faced. Looking for the killer of a white planter, a mob captured a black man and woman, their guilt or innocence unknown. They were tied to trees, and their fingers and ears were cut off as souvenirs. “The most excruciating form of punishment consisted in the use of a large corkscrew in the hands of some of the mob. This instrument was bored into the flesh of the man and the woman, in the arms, legs and body, and then pulled out, the spirals tearing out big pieces of raw, quivering flesh every time it was withdrawn.” Finally, both people were thrown on a fire and burned to death, “a relief,” a witness said, “to the maimed and suffering victims.” Many African Americans labored on the cotton farms and in the railroad camps, sawmills, and mines of the South under conditions of peonage. Peons traded their lives and labor for food and shelter. Often illiterate, they were forced to sign contracts allowing the planter “to use such force as he or his agents may deem necessary to require me to remain on his farm and perform good and satisfactory services.” Armed guards patrolled the camps and whipped those trying to escape. “In the woods,” a peon said, “they can do anything they please, and no one can see them but God.” Few blacks belonged to labor unions, and blacks almost always earned less than whites in the same job. In Atlanta, white electricians earned $5.00 a day, blacks $3.50. Black songs such as “I’ve Got a White Man Workin’ for Me” (1901) voiced more hope than reality. The illiteracy rate among African Americans dropped from 45 percent in 1900 to 30 percent in 1910, but nowhere were



 CHAPTER 22

THE PROGRESSIVE ERA

Watch the Video The Conflict Between Booker T. Washington
 and W.E.B. DuBois

 1960s, white mobs invaded black neighborhoods, burning, looting, and killing. They lynched two blacks—one eighty-four years old—in Springfield. Outrage was voiced by William E. Walling, a wealthy southerner and settlement house worker; Mary Ovington, a white anthropology student; and Oswald Garrison Villard, grandson of the famous abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison. Along with other reformers, white and black (among them Jane Addams and John Dewey), they issued a call for the conference that organized the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), which swiftly became the most

 important civil rights organization in the country. Created in 1909, within five years the NAACP grew to fifty branches and more than six thousand members. Walling headed it, and Du Bois, the only African American among the top officers, directed publicity and edited The Crisis, the voice of the organization. Joined by the National Urban League, which was created in 1911, the NAACP pressured employers, labor unions, and the government on behalf of African Americans. It had some victories. In Guinn v. United States (1915), The differences between Booker T. Washington and W.E.B. DuBois were differences of personality, the Supreme Court overturned a “grandfather differences of leadership, and, quite frankly, differences over who was going to exercise power—a clause” that kept African Americans from votsouthern former slave or a northern African American intellectual. ing in Oklahoma, and in Buchanan v. Worley (1917), it struck down a law in Louisville, Kentucky, that required they given equal school facilities, teachers’ salaries, or educational residential segregation. In 1918, in the midst of World War I, the materials. In 1910, scarcely eight thousand African American NAACP and the National Urban League persuaded the federal govyouths were attending high schools in all the states of the Southeast. ernment to form a special Bureau of Negro Economics within the South Carolina spent $13.98 annually for the education of each Labor Department to look after the interests of African American white child, $1.13 for each black child. wage earners. African American leaders grew increasingly impatient with Despite these gains, African Americans continued to this kind of treatment, and in 1905 a group of them, led by socioloexperience disfranchisement, poor job opportunities, and gist W. E. B. DuBois, met near Niagara Falls, New York (they met segregation. As Booker T. Washington said in 1913, “I have never on the Canadian side of the Falls, since no hotel on the American seen the colored people so discouraged and so bitter as they are side would take them). There they pledged action in the matters at the present time.” of voting, equal access to economic opportunity, integration, and equality before the law. Rejecting Booker T. Washington’s gradualist approach, the Niagara Movement claimed for African “I Hear the Whistle”: Immigrants in Americans “every single right that belongs to a freeborn American, the Labor Force political, civil and social; and until we get these rights we will never While women and African Americans worked in growing cease to protest.” numbers, much of the huge increase in the labor force in these The Niagara Movement focused on equal rights and the eduyears came from outside the country, particularly from Europe cation of African American youth, of whom it said, “They have a and Mexico. Between 1901 and 1920, the extraordinarily high total right to know, to think, to aspire.” Keeping alive a program of miliof 14.5 million immigrants entered the country, more than in any tant action, it spawned later civil rights movements. Du Bois was previous twenty-year period. Continuing the trend begun in the its inspiration. In The Souls of Black Folk (1903) and other works, 1880s, many came from southern and eastern Europe. Still called he called eloquently for justice and equality. “By every civilized and the “new” immigrants, they met hostility from “older” immigrants peaceful method,” he said, “we must strive for the right which the of northern European stock who questioned their values, religion world accords to man.” (often Catholic or Jewish), traditions, and appearance. Peace was sometimes hard to come by. Race riots broke out Labor agents—called padroni among the Italians, Greeks, in Atlanta, Georgia, in 1906 and in Springfield, Illinois, in 1908, and Syrians—recruited immigrant workers, found them jobs, the latter the home of Abraham Lincoln. Unlike the riots of the

 Society’s Masses

 and deducted a fee from their wages. Headquartered in Salt Lake City, Leonidas G. Skliris, the “czar of the Greeks,” provided workers for the Utah Copper Company and the Western Pacific Railroad. In Chicago at the turn of the century, padroni employed more than one-fifth of all Italians; in New York City, they controlled two-thirds of the entire labor force. Immigrant patterns often departed from traditional stereotypes. Immigrants, for example, moved both to and from their homelands. Fifty percent or more of the members of some groups returned home, although the proportion varied. Jews and Czechs often brought their families to resettle in America; Serbs and Poles tended to come singly, intent on earning enough money to make a fresh start at home. Some migrants—Italian men, in particular—virtually commuted, returning home every slack season. These temporary migrants became known as birds of passage. The outbreak of World War I interrupted the practice and trapped thousands of Italians and others who had planned to return to Europe. Older residents lumped the newcomers together, ignoring geographic, religious, and other differences. Preserving important regional distinctions, Italians tended to settle as Calabreses, Venetians, Abruzzis, and Sicilians. Old-stock Americans viewed them all simply as Italians. Henry Ford and other employers tried to erase the differences through English classes and deliberate “Americanization” programs. The Ford Motor Company ran a school where immigrant employees were first taught to say, “I am a good American.” At the graduation ceremony, the pupils acted out a gigantic pantomime in which, clad in their old-country dress, they filed into a large “melting pot.” When they emerged, they were wearing identical American-made clothes, and each was waving a little American flag. In similar fashion, the International Harvester Corporation taught Polish laborers to speak English, but it had other lessons in view as well. According to Lesson One, drilled into the Polish “pupils”: I hear the whistle. I must hurry. I hear the five minute whistle. It is time to go into the shop. I take my check from the gate board and hang it on the department board. I change my clothes and get ready to work. The starting whistle blows. I eat my lunch. It is forbidden to eat until then. The whistle blows at five minutes of starting time. I get ready to go to work. I work until the whistle blows to quit. I leave my place nice and clean. I put all my clothes in the locker. I must go home. Labor groups soon learned to counter these techniques. The Women’s Trade Union League (WTUL) urged workers to ignore business-sponsored English lessons because they did not “tell the girl worker the things she really wants to know. They do not suggest that $5 a week is not a living wage. They tell her to be respectful to her employer.” Designing its own educational



 program, the WTUL in 1912 published “New World Lessons for Old World Peoples,” which provided quite a different kind of English lesson: A Union girl takes me into the Union. The Union girls are glad to see me. They call me sister. I will work hard for our Union. I will come to all the Union meetings. In another significant development at the beginning of the twentieth century, Mexicans for the first time immigrated in large numbers, especially after a revolution in Mexico in 1910 forced many to flee across the northern border into Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California. Their exact numbers were unknown. American officials did not count border crossings until 1907, and even then, many migrants avoided the official immigration stations. Almost all came from the Mexican lower class, eager to escape

IMMIGRATION TO THE UNITED STATES, 1900–1920 (BY AREA OF ORIGIN)
Immigrants (thousands) 
Northern and Western Europe
Southern and Eastern Europe




Asia, Africa, and America














 Note: For purposes of classification, “Northern and Western Europe” includes Great Britain, Ireland, Scandinavia, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, Switzerland, France, and Germany. “Southern and Eastern Europe” includes Poland, Austria-Hungary, Russia and the Baltic States, Romania, Bulgaria, European Turkey, Italy, Spain, Portugal, and Greece. “Asia, Africa, and America” includes Asian Turkey, China, Japan, India, Canada, the Caribbean, Latin America, and all of Africa. Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970, Bicentennial Edition, Washington, DC, 1975.



 CHAPTER 22

THE PROGRESSIVE ERA

 men outnumbered women by ten to one in the Chinese American population, and with a male median age of 42, their communities were generally dominated by the elderly. The Chinese American population differed in another respect as well. Unlike other immigrant groups, whose numbers tended to grow, the number of Chinese Americans shrank in these years— from about 125,000 in the early 1880s to just over 60,000 in 1920. After 1910, the U.S. government set up a special immigration facility at Angel Island in San Francisco Bay, but unlike European immigrants who landed at Ellis Island in New York and were quickly sent on, Chinese immigrants were kept for weeks and months, examined and reexamined, before being allowed to cross the narrow band of water to San Francisco. Angel Island remained open until 1940, and a poem carved into the wall of Building 317 showed the feelings of some of those who waited:

MEXICAN IMMIGRATION TO THE UNITED STATES, 1900–1920
Immigrants (thousands) 
 There are tens of thousands of poems composed on these walls, They are all cries of complaint and sadness. The day I am rid of this prison and attain success, I must remember that this prison once existed. In my daily needs I must be frugal. Needless extravagance leads youth to ruin. All my compatriots please be mindful. Once you have some small gains, return home early. By One from Xiangshan











 peonage and violence in their native land. Labor agents called coyotes—usually in the employ of large corporations or working for ranchers—recruited Mexican workers. Between 1900 and 1910, the Mexican population of Texas and New Mexico nearly doubled; in Arizona, it more than doubled; in California, it quadrupled. In all four states, it doubled again between 1910 and 1920. After the turn of the century, almost 10 percent of the total population of Mexico moved to the American Southwest. In time, these Mexican Americans and their children transformed the Southwest. They built most of the early highways in Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona; dug the irrigation ditches that watered crops throughout the area; laid railroad track; and picked the cotton and vegetables that clothed and fed millions of Americans. Many lived in shacks and shanties along the railroad tracks, isolated in a separate Spanish-speaking world. Like other immigrant groups, they also formed enclaves in the cities; these barrios became cultural islands of family life, foods, church, and festivals. Fewer people immigrated from China in these years, deterred in part by anti-Chinese laws and hostility. Like many other immigrants, most Chinese who came did not intend to remain. Wanting to make money and return home, they mined, farmed, and worked as common laborers. In their willingness to work hard for low wages, their desire to preserve clan and family associations from China, and their maintenance of strong ties with their home villages, Chinese Americans resembled other immigrant groups, but they differed in two important respects. As late as 1920,

 Many Japanese also arrived at Angel Island, and though at first fewer in numbers than the Chinese, they developed communities along the Pacific coast, where they settled mainly on farms. The number of Japanese Americans grew. In 1907, the heaviest year of immigration from Japan, nearly 31,000 Japanese entered the United States; by 1920, there were 111,000 Japanese in the country, nearly three-quarters of them in California. As the newcomers arrived from Asia, Europe, and Mexico, nativist sentiment, which had criticized earlier waves of immigrants, intensified. Old-stock Americans sneered at their dress and language. Racial theories emphasized the superiority of northern Europeans, and the new “science” of eugenics suggested the need to control the population growth of “inferior” peoples. Hostility toward Catholics and Jews was common but touched other groups as well. In 1902, Congress enacted a law prohibiting immigration from China. Statutes requiring literacy tests designed to curtail immigration from southern and eastern Europe were vetoed by William Howard Taft in 1913 and by Woodrow Wilson in 1915 and 1917. In 1917, such a measure passed despite Wilson’s veto. Other measures tried to limit immigration from Mexico and Japan.

Conflict in the Workplace
 Why were there so many strikes in this period? Assembly lines, speedups, long hours, and low pay produced a dramatic increase in American industrial output (and profits) after 1900; they also gave rise to numerous strikes and other kinds of labor unrest. Sometimes strikes took place through the

Conflict in the Workplace




 Japanese picture brides arrive at Angel Island and are lined up for passport inspection before meeting their new husbands.

 action of unions; sometimes workers just decided they had had enough and walked off the job. Whatever the cause, strikes were frequent. In one industry, in one city—the meatpacking industry in Chicago—there were 251 strikes in 1903 alone. Strikes and absenteeism increased after 1910; labor productivity dropped 10 percent between 1915 and 1918, the first such decline in memory. In many industries, labor turnover became a serious problem; workers changed jobs in droves. Union membership grew. In 1900, only about a million workers—less than 4 percent of the workforce— belonged to unions. By 1920, five million workers belonged, increasing the unionized portion of the workforce to about 13 percent. As tensions grew between capital and labor, some people in the middle class became fearful that, unless something was done to improve the workers’ situation, there might be violence or even revolution. This fear motivated some of the labor-oriented reforms of the Progressive Era. While some reform supporters genuinely wanted to improve labor’s lot, others embraced reform because they were afraid of something else.

Organizing Labor
 Samuel Gompers’s American Federation of Labor increased from 250,000 members in 1897 to 1.7 million in 1904. By far the largest union organization, it remained devoted to the interests of skilled craftspeople. While it aimed partly at better wages and working conditions, it also sought to limit entry into the crafts and protect worker prerogatives. Within limits, the AFL found acceptance among giant business corporations eager for conservative policies and labor stability. Of the eight million female workers in 1910, only 125,000 belonged to unions. Gompers continued to resist organizing them, saying they were too emotional and, as union organizers, “had a way of making serious mistakes.” Margaret Dreier Robins, an organizer of proven skill, scoffed at that. “These men died twenty years ago and are just walking around dead!” she protested. Robins helped found the Women’s Trade Union League in 1903. The WTUL led the effort to organize women into trade unions, to lobby for legislation protecting female workers, and to educate the



 CHAPTER 22

THE PROGRESSIVE ERA

Read the Document


Samuel Gompers, The American Labor Movement (1914)


 Samuel Gompers (second from bottom left) co-founded the American Federation of Labor in 1886 and served as its president in 1914 when its membership approached two million skilled workers. Gompers’s trade union philosophy focused on the economic ends of skilled workers including achieving higher wages, the eight-hour day, and safe working conditions through collective bargaining with employers.

 public on the problems and needs of working women. It took in all working women who would join, regardless of skill (although not, at first, African American women), and it won crucial financial support from well-to-do women such as Anne Morgan, daughter of the feared financier J. P. Morgan. Robins’s close friend Jane Addams belonged, as did Mary McDowell, the “Angel of the Stockyards,” who worked with slaughterhouse workers in Chicago; Julia Lathrop, who tried to improve the lot of wage-earning children; and Dr. Alice Hamilton, a pioneer in American research on the causes of industrial disease. The WTUL never had many members—a few thousand at most—but its influence extended far beyond its membership. In 1909, it supported the “Uprising of the 20,000,” a strike of shirtwaist workers in New York City. When female employees of the

 Triangle Shirtwaist Company tried to form a union, the company fired them, and they walked out; twenty thousand men and women in five hundred other shops followed. Strike meetings were conducted in three languages—English, Yiddish, and Italian—and before being forced to go back to work, the strikers won a shorter workweek and a few other gains. Sadly, the Triangle women lost out on another important demand—for unlocked shop doors and safe fire escapes. Their loss proved lethal in the famous Triangle Shirtwaist Company fire of 1911 (see the Feature Essay, “The Triangle Fire,” pp. 528–529). The WTUL also backed a strike in 1910 against Hart, Schaff ner and Marx, Chicago’s largest manufacturer of men’s clothing. One day, Annie Shapiro, the 18-year-old daughter of Russian immigrants, was told her wages were being cut from

Conflict in the Workplace


 $7 a week to $6.20. That was a large cut, and along with sixteen other young women, Shapiro refused to accept it and walked out. “We had to be recognized as people,” she said later. Soon other women walked out, and the revolt spread. Managers quickly promised to restore the cuts, but as one woman said, “just then there was big noise outside and we all rushed to the windows and there we saw the police beating the strikers on our account, and when we saw that we went out.” In a matter of days, some forty thousand garment workers were on strike, about half of them women. Manufacturers hurried to negotiate, and the result was the important Hart, Schaffner agreement, which created an arbitration committee composed of management and labor to handle grievances and settle disputes. The first successful experiment in collective bargaining, the Hart, Schaffner agreement became the model for the kind of agreements that govern industrial relations today. Another union, the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), attracted by far the greatest attention (and the most fears) in these years. Unlike the WTUL, it welcomed everyone regardless of gender or race. Unlike the AFL, it tried to organize the unskilled and foreign-born laborers who worked in the mass production industries. Founded in Chicago in 1905, it aimed to unite the American working class into a mammoth union to promote labor’s interests. Its motto— ”An injury to one is an injury to all”—emphasized labor solidarity, as had the earlier Knights of Labor. But unlike the Knights, the IWW, or Wobblies as they were often known, urged social revolution. “It is our purpose to overthrow the capitalist system by forcible means if necessary,” William D. “Big Bill” Haywood, one of its founders, said; and he went on in his speeches to say he knew of nothing a worker could do that “will bring as much anguish to LABOR UNION MEMBERSHIP, 1897–1920 Millions



 the boss as a little sabotage in the right place.” Joe Hill, the IWW’s legendary folk poet, reminded labor of its potential strength: If the workers took a notion They could stop all speeding trains; Every ship upon the ocean They can tie with mighty chains. Every wheel in the creation Every mine and every mill; Fleets and armies of the nation, Will at their command stand still. IWW leaders included Mary Harris (“Mother”) Jones, a famous veteran of battles in the Illinois coalfields; Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, a fiery young radical who joined as a teenager; and Big Bill Haywood himself, the strapping one-eyed founder of the Western Federation of Miners. The IWW led a number of major strikes. Strikes in Lawrence, Massachusetts (1912), and Paterson, New Jersey (1912), attracted national attention: in Lawrence, when the strikers sent their children, ill-clad and hungry, out of the city to stay with sympathetic families; in Paterson, when they rented New York’s Madison Square Garden for a massive labor pageant. IWW leaders welcomed the revolutionary tumult sweeping Russia and other countries. In the United States, they thought, a series of local strikes would bring about capitalist repression, then a general strike, and eventually a workers’ commonwealth. The IWW fell short of these objectives, but during its lifetime— from 1905 to the mid-1920s—it made major gains among immigrant workers in the Northeast, migrant farm laborers on the Plains, and loggers and miners in the South and Far West. In factories like Ford’s, it recruited workers resentful of the speedups on the assembly lines. Although IWW membership probably amounted to no more than one hundred thousand at any one time, workers came and left so often that its total membership may have reached as high as one million.

 Working with Workers







1897 1900










Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract of the United States:
 1982–1983, 103rd ed., Washington, DC, 1982.

 Concerned about labor unrest, some business leaders used violence and police action to keep workers in line, but others turned to the new fields of applied psychology and personnel management. A school of industrial psychology emerged. As had Taylor, industrial psychologists studied workers’ routines, and, further, they showed that output was also affected by job satisfaction. While most businesses pushed ahead with efficiency campaigns, a few did establish industrial relations departments, hire public relations firms to improve their corporate image, and link productivity to job safety and worker happiness. Ivy L. Lee, a pioneer in the field of corporate public relations, advised clients such as the Pennsylvania Railroad and Standard Oil on how to improve relations with labor and the public. Calling himself a “physician to corporate bodies,” Lee urged complete openness on the company’s part. To please employees, companies printed newsletters and organized softball teams; they awarded prizes and celebrated retirements. Ford created a “sociology department” staffed by 150 experts who showed workers how to budget their incomes and care for their health. They even taught them how to shop for meat.

 Complete the Assignment The Triangle Fire on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


W


 omen’s fashion changed rather dramatically in the 1890s and early 1900s, reflecting in part the desires of women for greater freedom in many parts of their lives. Confining corsets began to disappear, as women turned to looser, more casual designs. The “shirtwaist,” or blouse, became especially popular, flattering to the figure and tapered to a fitted waistline, usually worn with a tailored skirt. That trend brought business, a great deal of it, to the Triangle Waist Company of New York City, which employed more than 500 people and was the largest maker of blouses in the city. It produced 2,000 of them a day, a million dollars’ worth a year. At Triangle, as at similar companies, immigrants from Eastern Europe provided much of the labor. The Triangle Company did not pay well— none of the companies did—but to many immigrants it was a good place to work because, unlike many competitors, it offered jobs all year round. Triangle also reflected an important factory movement, characteristic of these years, in which the garment industry changed from the traditional piece-work system to large, efficient, and mass-production factories. Under the old system, each worker had pushed a treadle, usually in her own apartment, to power her machine; now, electricity powered long drive shafts that connected machine after machine. Triangle Company employees worked hard, five nine-hour days a week, plus a shorter seven-hour day on Saturdays. Saturday was also payday. That was why people were at work on Saturday, March 25, 1911.

The Triangle Fire


 At 4:45 P.M. that day, floor leader Annah Gullo rang the closing bell and shut off the power to the drive shafts; the machines fell silent. Chairs pushed back on the wooden floors as workers made their way to the exits to pick up their pay and get their coats for home. Then suddenly, a worker came running across the floor, shouting, “Fire!” Workers grabbed the fire pails from a ledge above the tables and poured water on the fire, but to no avail. Other workers were already lined up at wooden partitions near the exits, which channeled them through one at a time so that watchmen could look in their handbags for stolen lace or blouses. Smoke pouring from the eighth floor windows soon attracted a crowd of bystanders outside. When a large, dark bundle fell from one of the windows, an onlooker said, “He’s trying to save his best cloth.” When another bundle hit the ground, people realized that this was not cloth; it was a human being. “I learned a new sound,” a reporter said that day, “a more horrible sound than description can picture. It was the thud of a speeding, living body on a stone sidewalk.” The first person jumped at about 4:50 P.M., deciding not to die in the raging fire. But it was hard to survive the jump, too; the street was nearly 100 feet below, and in March 1911, ladders on fire trucks could reach no higher than the sixth floor. Inside, people screamed as they searched for the exits, eyes blinded by the shifting smoke. As they crowded onto the flimsy fire escape, it twisted and fell, the victim of its own poor design. Adding to the tragedy, workers at Triangle had gone on strike in 1909, two years before, in the famous Uprising of the 20,000, “the largest strike ever organized by working women anywhere

 in the world,” as one journalist has noted. Some garment workers had won, but the Triangle women had not. They had asked for adequate fire escapes and unblocked exits; they got neither. “I remembered their great strike . . ., in which these girls demanded more sanitary workrooms, and more safety precautions in the shops,” a reporter wrote after the fire. “These dead bodies told the result.” In the days following the fire, protest meetings were held across the city. “I would be a traitor to those poor burned bodies if I were to come here to talk good fellowship,” Rose Schneiderman, a dynamic 29-year-old organizer for the Women’s Trade Union League, told one rally. “We have tried you good people of the public—and we have found you wanting . . . . This is not the first time girls have been burned alive in this city. Every week I must learn of the untimely death of one of my sister workers. Every year thousands of us are maimed. The life of men and women is so cheap and property is so sacred!” One hundred forty-six people, nearly all young women, died in the fire. The fire galvanized reformers interested in factory safety, and there were many of them in this Progressive Era. Frances Perkins, later secretary of labor under Franklin D. Roosevelt, the first female cabinet member in the country’s history, was visiting friends near the Triangle factory on the day of the fire. They heard the fire engines and rushed out to see what was happening. “We got there just as they started to jump,” Perkins recalled. “I shall never forget the frozen horror which came over us as we stood with our hands on our throats, watching that horrible sight, knowing that there was no help.”

View the Closer Look


Triangle Fire: March 25, 1911


 Crowds of young women who made it out onto the fire escape perished when it gave way under their weight.

 On April 5, signaling public protest, eighty thousand people marched silently in the rain in a funeral procession up Fifth Avenue. A quarter-million people lined the route. In response to the outcry, New York State authorities created a Factory Investigating Commission that sent examiners into factories across the state. In all, the tragedy spurred passage of thirty-six new labor laws, a new

Industrial Code for the State of New York,
 and higher national standards for factory safety. New laws required automatic fire sprinklers in high-rise buildings, mandatory fire drills, and unlocked doors at factory exits. Frances Perkins, who had advised the Commission, thought the events at Triangle had lasting consequences. “The Triangle fire,” she later said, “was the first day of the New Deal.”

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
What changes in American society and industry lay behind the circumstances of the Triangle Fire? 2. Why were so many women killed in the Triangle Fire? 3. Why did Frances Perkins say that the Triangle Fire was “the first day of the New Deal”? 


 CHAPTER 22

THE PROGRESSIVE ERA

 On January 5, 1914, Ford took another significant step. He announced the five-dollar day, “the greatest revolution,” he said, “in the matter of rewards for workers ever known to the industrial world.” With a stroke, he doubled the wage rate for common labor, reduced the working day from nine hours to eight, and established a personnel department to place workers in appropriate jobs. The next day, ten thousand applicants stood outside the gates. As a result, Ford had the pick of the labor force. Turnover declined; absenteeism, previously as much as one-tenth of all Ford workers every day, fell to 0.3 percent. Output increased; the IWW at Ford collapsed. The plan increased wages, but it also gave the company greater control over a more stable labor force. Workers had to meet a behavior code in order to qualify for the five-dollar day. At first scornful of the “utopian” plan, business leaders across the country soon copied it, and on January 2, 1919, Ford announced the six-dollar day.

Amoskeag
 In size, system, and worker relations, the record of the Amoskeag Company textile mills was revealing. Located beside the Merrimack River in Manchester, New Hampshire, the mills—an enormous complex of factories, warehouses, canals, and machinery—had been built in the 1830s. By the turn of the century, they were producing nearly fifty miles of cloth an hour, more cloth each day than any other set of mills in the entire world. The face of the mills, an almost solid wall of red brick, stretched nearly a mile. Archways and bridges pierced the facade. Amoskeag resembled a walled medieval city within which workers found “a total institution, a closed and almost self-contained world.” At first the mills employed young women for labor, but by 1900, more and more immigrant males staffed the machines. French Canadians, Irish, Poles, and Greeks—seventeen thousand in all—worked there, and their experiences revealed a great deal about factory work and life at the turn of the century. The company hired and fired at will, and it demanded relentless output from the spindles and spinning frames. Yet it also viewed employees as its “children” and looked for total loyalty in return, an expectation often realized. Workers identified with Amoskeag and, decades later, still called themselves Amoskeag men and women. “We were all like a family,” one said. Most Amoskeag workers preferred the industrial world of the mills to the farms they had left behind. They did not feel displaced; they knew the pains of industrial life, and they adapted in ways that fit their own needs and traditions. Families played a large role. They neither disintegrated nor lost their relationships. French Canadians and others often came in family units. One or two family members left the farm for the mills, maintained close ties with those back home, and then sent for others, creating a form of “chain migration.” Once in Manchester, families often toiled in the same workrooms. Looking after each other, they asked for transfers and promotions for relatives; they taught their children technical skills and how to get along with bosses and fellow workers. Although low paid, Amoskeag employees took pride in their work, and for many of them, a well-turned-out product provided dignity and self-esteem. As part of its paternal interest in employee welfare, in 1910 the company inaugurated a welfare and efficiency program,

 which aimed to increase productivity, accustom immigrants to industrial work, instill company loyalty, and curb labor unrest. Playgrounds and visiting nurses, home-buying plans, a cooking school, and dental service were part of the plan. The Amoskeag Textile Club held employee dinners and picnics, organized shooting clubs and a baseball team, sponsored Christmas parties for the children, and published the Amoskeag Bulletin, a monthly magazine of employee news. From 1885 to 1919, no strike touched the mills. Thereafter, however, labor unrest increased. Overproduction and foreign competition took their toll, and Amoskeag closed in 1935.

A
New Urban Culture  What happened to art and culture in these years so filled with change? For many Americans, the quality of life improved significantly between 1900 and 1920. Jobs were relatively plentiful, and, in a development of great importance, more and more people were entering the professions as doctors, lawyers, teachers, and engineers. With comfortable incomes, a growing middle class could take advantage of new lifestyles, inventions, and forms of entertainment. Mass production could not have worked without mass consumption, and Americans in these years increasingly became a nation of consumers.

Production and Consumption
 In 1900, business firms spent about $95 million on advertising; twenty years later, they spent more than $500 million. Ads and billboards touted cigarettes, cars, perfumes, and cosmetics. Advertising agencies boomed. Using new sampling techniques, they developed modern concepts of market testing and research. Sampling customer preferences affected business indirectly as well, making it more responsive to public opinion on social and political issues. Mass production swept the clothing industry and dressed more Americans better than any people ever before. Using lessons learned in making uniforms during the Civil War, manufacturers for the first time developed standard clothing and shoe sizes that fit most bodies. Clothing prices dropped; the availability of inexpensive “off-the-rack” clothes lessened distinctions between rich and poor. By 1900, nine of every ten men and boys wore the new “ready-to-wear” clothes. In 1900, people employed in manufacturing earned on average $418 a year. Two decades later, they earned $1,342 a year, though inflation took much of the increase. While the middle class expanded, the rich also grew richer. In 1920, the new income tax showed the first accurate tabulation of income, and it confirmed what many had suspected all along. Five percent of the population received almost one-fourth of all income.

Living and Dying in an Urban Nation
 In 1920, the median age of the population was only 25. (It is now 35.) Immigration accounted for part of the population’s youthfulness, since most immigrants were young. Thanks to

A
New Urban Culture 

 medical advances and better living conditions, the death rate dropped in the early years of the century; the average life span increased. Between 1900 and 1920, life expectancy rose from 49 to 56 years for white women and from 47 to 54 years for white men. It rose from 33 to 45 years for blacks and other racial minorities. Despite the increase in life expectancy, infant mortality remained high; nearly 10 percent of white babies and 20 percent of minority babies died in the first year of life. In comparison to today, fewer babies on average survived to adolescence, and fewer people survived beyond middle age. In 1900, the death rate among people between 45 and 65 was more than twice the modern rate. As a result, there were relatively fewer older people—in 1900, only 4 percent of the population was older than 65 compared to nearly 13 percent today. Fewer children than today knew their grandparents. Still, improvements in health care helped people live longer, and as a result, the incidence of cancer and heart disease increased. Cities grew, and by any earlier standards, they grew on a colossal scale. Downtowns became a central hive of skyscrapers, department stores, warehouses, and hotels. Strips of factories radiated from the center. As street railways spread, cities took on a systematic pattern of socioeconomic segregation, usually in rings. The innermost ring filled with immigrants, circled by a belt of working-class housing. The remaining rings marked areas of rising affluence outward toward wealthy suburbs, which themselves formed around shopping strips and grid patterns of streets that restricted social interaction. The giants were New York, Chicago, and Philadelphia, industrial cities that turned out every kind of product from textiles to structural steel. Smaller cities such as Rochester, New York, or Cleveland, Ohio, specialized in manufacturing a specific line of goods or processing regional products for the national market. Railroads instead of highways tied things together; in 1916, the rail network, the largest in the world, reached its peak—254,000 miles of track that carried more than three-fourths of all intercity freight tonnage. Step by step, cities adopted their twentieth-century forms. Between 1909 and 1915, Los Angeles, a city of three hundred thousand people, passed a series of ordinances that gave rise to modern urban zoning. For the first time, the ordinances divided a city into three districts of specified use: a residential area, an industrial area, and an area open to residence and a limited list of industries. Other cities followed. Combining several features, the New York zoning law of 1916 became the model for the nation; within a decade, 591 cities copied it. Zoning ordered city development, keeping skyscrapers out of factory districts, factories out of the suburbs. It also had powerful social repercussions. In the South, zoning became a tool to extend racial segregation; in northern cities, it acted against ethnic minorities. Jews in New York, Italians in Boston, Poles in Detroit, African Americans in Chicago—zoning laws held them all at arm’s length. Like other migrants, African Americans often preferred to settle together, but zoning also helped put them there. By 1920, ten districts in Chicago were more than three-quarters black. In Los Angeles, Cleveland, Detroit, and Washington, D.C., most blacks lived in only two or three wards.



Popular Pastimes
 Thanks to changing work rules and mechanization, many Americans enjoyed more leisure time. The average workweek for manufacturing laborers fell from 60 hours in 1890 to 51 in 1920. By the early 1900s, white-collar workers might spend only 8 to 10 hours a day at work and a half day on weekends. Greater leisure time gave more people more opportunity for play, and people flocked to places of entertainment. Baseball entrenched itself as the national pastime. Automobiles and streetcars carried growing numbers of fans to ballparks; attendance at major league games doubled between 1903 and 1920. Football also drew fans, although critics attacked the sport’s violence and the use of “tramp athletes,” nonstudents whom colleges paid to play. In 1905, the worst year, 18 players were killed and 150 seriously injured. Alarmed, President Theodore Roosevelt—who had once said, “I am the father of three boys [and] if I thought any one of them would weigh a possible broken bone against the glory of being chosen to play on Harvard’s football team I would disinherit him”—called a White House conference to clean up college sports. The conference founded the Intercollegiate Athletic Association, which in 1910 became the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA). Movie theaters opened everywhere. By 1910, there were ten thousand of them, drawing a weekly audience of ten million people. Admission was usually five cents, and movies full of laughter and pathos appealed to a mass market. In 1915, D. W. Griffith, a talented and creative director—as well as a racist—produced the first movie spectacular: Birth of a Nation. Griffith adopted new film techniques, including close-ups, fade-outs, and artistic camera angles, and he staged dramatic battle scenes. Phonographs brought ready-made entertainment into the home. By 1901, phonograph and record companies included the Victor Talking Machine Company, the Edison Speaking Machine Company, and Columbia Records. Ornate mahogany Victrolas became standard fixtures in middle-class parlors. Early records were usually of vaudeville skits; orchestral recordings began in 1906. In 1919, 2.25 million phonographs were produced; two years later, more than 100 million records were sold. As record sales grew, families sang less and listened more. Music became a business. In 1909, Congress enacted a copyright law that provided a two-cent royalty on each piece of music on phonograph records or piano rolls. The royalty, small as it was, offered welcome income to composers and publishers, and in 1914, composer Victor Herbert and others formed the American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers (ASCAP) to protect musical rights and royalties. The faster rhythms of syncopated ragtime became the rage, especially after 1911, when Irving Berlin, a Russian immigrant, wrote “Alexander’s Ragtime Band.” Ragtime set off a nationwide dance craze. Secretaries danced on their lunch hour, the first nightclubs opened, and restaurants and hotels introduced dance floors. Waltzes and polkas gave way to a host of new dances, many with



 CHAPTER 22

THE PROGRESSIVE ERA

 Another musical innovation came north from New Orleans. Charles (Buddy) Bolden, a cornetist; Ferdinand “Jelly Roll” Morton, a pianist; and a youngster named Louis Armstrong played an improvisational music that had no formal name. Reaching Chicago, it became “jas,” then “jass,” and finally “jazz.” Jazz jumped, and jazz musicians relied on feeling and mood. A restaurant owner once asked Jelly Roll Morton to play a waltz. “Waltz?” Morton exclaimed. “Man, these people want to dance! And you talking about waltz. This is the Roll you’re talking to.” Popular fiction reflected changing interests. Kate Douglas Wiggins’s Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm (1903) and Lucy M. Montgomery’s Anne of Green Gables (1908) showed the continuing popularity of rural themes. Westerns also sold well, but readers turned more and more to detective thrillers with hard-bitten city detectives and science fiction featuring the latest dream in technology. The Tom Swift series, begun in 1910, looked ahead to spaceships, ray guns, and gravity nullifiers. Edward L. Stratemeyer, the mind behind Tom Swift, brought the techniques of mass production to book writing. In 1906, he formed the Stratemeyer Literary Syndicate, which employed a stable of writers to turn Consisting of a wide variety, vaudeville was probably the most popular mass entertainment in the out hundreds of Tom Swift, Rover Boys, and early 1900s. With the addition of jugglers, pantomimists, magicians, and others, the number of Bobbsey Twins stories for young readers. Burt vaudeville theaters increased exponentially. Standish, another prolific author, took the pen name Gilbert Patten and created the character of Frank Merriwell, animal names: the fox-trot, bunny hop, turkey trot, snake, and wholesome college athlete. As Patten said, “I took the three qualikangaroo dip. Partners were not permitted to dance too close; ties I most wanted him to represent—frank and merry in nature, bouncers tapped them on the shoulder if they got closer than nine well in body and mind—and made the name Frank Merriwell.” The inches. The aging John D. Rockefeller hired a private instructor to Merriwell books sold twenty-five million copies. teach him the tango; Yale University, however, banned that dance at its 1914 junior prom. Vaudeville, increasingly popular after 1900, reached matuExperimentation in the Arts rity around 1915. Drawing on the immigrant experience, it voiced “There is a state of unrest all over the world in art as in all other the variety of city life and included skits, songs, comics, acrobats, things,” the director of New York’s Metropolitan Museum said in and magicians. Dances and jokes showed an earthiness new to 1908. “It is the same in literature, as in music, in painting, and mass audiences. By 1914, stage runways extended into the crowd; in sculpture.” women performers had bared their legs and were beginning to Isadora Duncan and Ruth St. Denis transformed the dance. show glimpses of the midriff. Fanny Brice; Ann Pennington, the Departing from traditional ballet steps, both women emphasized “shimmy” queen; and Eva Tanguay, who sang “It’s All Been Done improvisation, emotion, and the human form. “Listen to the music Before But Not the Way I Do It,” starred in Florenz Ziegfeld’s Follies, with your soul,” Duncan told her students. “Unless your dancing the peak of vaudeville. springs from an inner emotion and expresses an idea, it will be In such songs as “St. Louis Blues” (1914), W. C. Handy took meaningless.” Draped in flowing robes, she revealed more of her legs the black southern folk music of the blues to northern cities. than some thought tasteful, and she proclaimed that the “noblest art Gertrude “Ma” Rainey, the daughter of minstrels, sang in black is the nude.” After a triumphant performance with the New York vaudeville for nearly thirty-five years. Performing in Chattanooga, Symphony in 1908, her ideas and techniques swept the country. Tennessee, about 1910, she came across a twelve-year-old orphan, Duncan died tragically in 1927, her neck broken when her long red Bessie Smith, who became the “Empress of the Blues.” Smith’s scarf caught in the wheel of a racing car. voice was huge and sweeping. Recording for the Race division The lofts and apartments of New York’s Greenwich Village of Columbia Records, she made more than eighty records that attracted artists, writers, and poets interested in experimentation together sold nearly ten million copies. Watch the Video

A
Vaudeville Act 

Conclusion: A Ferment of Discovery and Reform


 and change. To these artists, the city was the focus of national life and the sign of a new culture. Robert Henri and the realist painters—known to their critics as the Ashcan School—relished the city’s excitement. They wanted, a friend said, “to paint truth and to paint it with strength and fearlessness and individuality.” To the realists, a painting carried into the future the look of life as it happened. Their paintings depicted street scenes, colorful crowds, and slum children swimming in the river. In paintings such as the Cliff Dwellers, George W. Bellows captured the color and excitement of the tenements; John Sloan, one of Henri’s most talented students, painted the vitality of ordinary people and familiar scenes. In 1913, a show at the New York Armory presented sixteen hundred modernist paintings, prints, and sculptures. The work of Picasso, Cézanne, Matisse, Brancusi, Van Gogh, and Gauguin dazed and dazzled American observers. Critics attacked the show as worthless and depraved; a Chicago official wanted it banned from the city because the “idea that people can gaze at this sort of thing without [it] hurting them is all bosh.” The postimpressionists changed the direction of twentiethcentury art and influenced adventuresome American painters. John Marin, Max Weber, Georgia O’Keeffe, Arthur Dove, and other modernists experimented in ways foreign to Henri’s realists. Defiantly avant-garde, they shook off convention and experimented with new forms. Using bold colors and abstract patterns, they worked to capture the energy of urban life. “I see great forces at work, great movements,” Marin said, “the large buildings and the small buildings, the warring of the great and the small. . . . I can hear the sound of their strife, and there is a great music being played.” There was an extraordinary outburst of poetry. In 1912, Harriet Monroe started the magazine Poetry in Chicago, the hotbed of the new poetry; Ezra Pound and Vachel Lindsay, both daring experimenters with ideas and verse, published in the first issue. T. S. Eliot published the classic “Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock” in Poetry in 1915. Attacked bitterly by conservative critics, the poem established Eliot’s leadership among a group of poets, many of them living and writing in London, who rejected traditional meter and rhyme as artificial constraints. Eliot, Pound, and Amy Lowell, among others, believed the poet’s task was to capture fleeting images in verse. Others experimenting with new techniques in poetry included Robert Frost (North of Boston, 1914), Edgar Lee Masters (Spoon River Anthology, 1915), and Carl Sandburg (Chicago Poems, 1916). Sandburg’s poem “Chicago” celebrated the vitality of the city: Come and show me another city with lifted head singing so proud to be alive and coarse and strong and cunning. .................................................



 Fierce as a dog with tongue lapping for action, cunning as a savage pitted against the wilderness, Bareheaded, Shoveling, Wrecking, Planning, Building, breaking, rebuilding, ................................................. Bragging and laughing that under his wrist is the pulse, and under his ribs the heart of the people, Laughing! Laughing the stormy, husky, brawling laughter of Youth, half-naked, sweating, proud to be Hog Butcher, Tool Maker, Stacker of Wheat, Player with Railroads and Freight Handler to the Nation.

Conclusion: A Ferment of
Discovery and Reform
 Manners and morals change slowly, and many Americans overlooked the importance of the first two decades of the twentieth century. Yet sweeping change was under way; anyone who doubted it could visit a gallery, see a film, listen to music, or read one of the new literary magazines. Garrets and galleries were filled with a breathtaking sense of change. “There was life in all these new things,” Marsden Hartley, a modernist painter, recalled. “There was excitement, there was healthy revolt, investigation, discovery, and an utterly new world out of it all.” The ferment of progressivism in city, state, and nation reshaped the country. In a burst of reform, people built playgrounds, restructured taxes, regulated business, won the vote for women, shortened working hours, altered political systems, opened kindergartens, and improved factory safety. They tried to fulfill the national promise of dignity and liberty. Marsden Hartley, it turned out, had voiced a mood that went well beyond painters and poets. Across society, people in many walks of life were experiencing a similar sense of excitement and discovery. Racism, repression, and labor conflict were present, to be sure, but there was also talk of hope, progress, and change. In politics, science, journalism, education, and a host of other fields, people believed for a time that they could make a difference, and in trying to do so, they became part of the progressive generation.



 CHAPTER 22

CHAPTER REVIEW

Study
 y Resources Take the Study Plan for Chapter 22 The Progressive Era on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1898
Mergers and consolidations begin to sweep the business world, leading to fear of trusts 
 1903 Ford Motor Company formed; W. E. B. DuBois calls







 for justice and equality for African Americans in The Souls of Black Folk; Women’s Trade Union League (WTUL) formed to organize women workers Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) established; African American leaders inaugurate the Niagara Movement, advocating integration and equal opportunity for African Americans Shirtwaist workers in New York City strike in the Uprising of the 20,000; Campaign by Rockefeller Sanitary Commission wipes out hookworm disease NAACP founded; Strike at Hart, Schaffner and Marx leads to pioneering collective bargaining agreement; National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) formed Fire at the Triangle Shirtwaist Company kills 146 people; Irving Berlin popularizes rhythm of ragtime with “Alexander’s Ragtime Band”;





 Frederick Winslow Taylor publishes The Principles of Scientific Management Harriet Monroe begins publishing magazine Poetry; IWW leads strikes in Massachusetts and New Jersey Ford introduces the moving assembly line in Highland Park, Michigan, plant; Mother’s Day becomes national holiday D. W. Griffith produces the first movie spectacular, Birth of a Nation; T. S. Eliot publishes “The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock” Margaret Sanger forms New York Birth Control League; Federal Aid Roads Act creates national road network; New York zoning law sets the pattern for zoning laws across the nation Congress passes law requiring literacy test for all immigrants Congress passes the Sheppard-Towner Act to help protect maternal and infant health

CHAPTER REVIEW
The Changing Face of Industrialism How did industrialism change after 1900? 
Conflict in the Workplace
 Why were there so many strikes in this period?

 As prosperity returned after the late 1890s, the American industrial system underwent important changes. Mass production, spurred by the spread of the moving assembly line, turned out more and more products for American and foreign consumers. New management methods organized workers on the factory floor. Jobs became both routine and more dangerous. Trusts grew. (p. 515)

 Low wages, speeded-up assembly lines, and dangerous conditions in the workplace brought about numerous attempts to organize workers for their own defense. The Women’s Trade Union League had many successes. The International Workers of the World, a radical union, wanted to place workers in control. In the end, Samuel Gompers and the American Federation of Labor won the allegiance of most workers. (p. 524)

 Society’s Masses

A
New Urban Culture 

 How did mass production affect women, children, immigrants, and African Americans?

 What happened to art and culture in these years so filled with change?

 While life improved for many people in the post-1900 industrial society, many others faced challenges: women and children in the workforce, and laborers in their efforts to organize. Between 1901 and 1920, some 14.8 million immigrants entered the country and began the difficult process of adjusting to life in their new home. All of these people faced difficult challenges due to low wages, dangerous working conditions, and the steady demands of the factory system. (p. 519)

 In the dozen years after 1900, American culture changed in important ways. Cities took on their modern form. Suburbs flourished. Sports became increasingly popular, reflecting people’s increased leisure time. Experimentation occurred in literature, poetry, painting, and the arts. (p. 530)

STUDY RESOURCES



KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Muckrakers Writers who made a practice between 1903 and 1909 of exposing the wrongdoings of public figures and corporations and highlighting social and political problems. p. 514 
 Birds of passage Immigrants who came to the United States to work and save money and then returned to their native countries during the slack season. p. 523

 Progressivism Movement for social change between the late 1890s and World War I. Its orgins lay in a fear of big business and corrupt government and a desire to improve living conditions. Progressives set out to cure the social ills brought about by industrialization and urbanization, social disorder, and corruption. p. 515

 Women’s Trade Union League (WTUL) Founded in 1903, this group worked to organize women into trade unions. It also lobbied for laws to safeguard female workers and backed strikes, especially in the garment industry. While it never attracted many members, its leaders were influential enough to give the union considerable power. p. 523

 Niagara Movement A movement, led by W. E. B. DuBois, that focused on equal rights for and the education of African American youth. Rejecting the gradualist approach of Booker T. Washington, it favored militant action and claimed for African Americans all the rights afforded to other Americans. p. 522

 Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) Founded in 1905, this radical union, also known as the Wobblies, aimed to unite the American working class into one union. It organized unskilled and foreign-born laborers, advocated social revolution, and led strikes. p. 527

National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
 (NAACP) Created in 1909, this organization became the most important civil rights organization in the country. p. 522

 Ashcan School Early twentieth-century realist painters who portrayed the slums and streets of the nation’s cities and the lives of ordinary urban dwellers. They often advocated political and social reform. p. 533

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
How did the changing nature of industrialism after the 1890s influence the beginnings of a Progressive Era? 
 2. In what specific ways did workers, African Americans, and immigrants respond to the changing nature of industrial society and in the process help bring about the Progressive Era?

 3. How did workers organize to try to improve their lot in the cities and factories of the advancing industrial society?

 4. How did changes in popular culture mold attitudes in the new Progressive Era?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 22 on MyHistoryLab The Changing Face of Industrialism Watch the Video

The Rise and Fall of the Automobile


Conflict in the Workplace
◾


Read the Document


◾


Complete the Assignment


Economy p. 516


◾


Read the Document


Frederick Winslow Taylor,
Scientific Management (1911) p. 518


◾
 Society’s Masses Watch the Video

Rural Free Delivery Mail p. 519


Gifford Pinchot, The Fight for
Conservation (1910) p. 520


Read the Document


John Spargo, The Bitter Cry of
 the Children (1906) p. 521 Watch the Video

View the Closer Look


The Triangle Fire p. 528


Triangle Fire, March 25, 1911


 p. 529

Read the Document


◾


Samuel Gompers: The American
Labor Movement (1914) p. 526


The Conflict Between Booker T.
 Washington and W.E.B. DuBois p. 522

A
New Urban Culture Watch the Video


A
Vaudeville Act p. 532 

◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment




From Roosevelt to Wilson
 in the Age of Progressivism

Contents and Learning Objectives
THE SPIRIT OF PROGRESSIVISM PG. 537
What were the six major characteristics of progressivism? 
REFORM IN THE CITIES AND STATES PG. 544
What methods did progressive reformers use to attack problems in the cities and states? 
THE ORDEAL OF WILLIAM HOWARD TAFT PG. 550
Why was the presidency of William Howard Taft so difficult for him? 
WOODROW WILSON’S NEW FREEDOM PG. 553

THE REPUBLICAN ROOSEVELT PG. 546
How would you describe the personality and programs of Theodore Roosevelt? 
 What were the central principles of Woodrow Wilson’s New Freedom? ◾ FEATURE ESSAY Madam C. J. Walker: African American Business Pioneer

ROOSEVELT PROGRESSIVISM AT ITS HEIGHT PG. 548
What were the major measures of Theodore Roosevelt’s term from 1905 to 1909? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

