Chapter 13 An Age of Expansionism


The Spirit of Young America
 In the 1840s and early 1850s, politicians, writers, and entrepreneurs frequently proclaimed themselves champions of Young America. One of the first to use the phrase was the famous author and lecturer Ralph Waldo Emerson, who told an audience of merchants and manufacturers in 1844 that the nation was entering a new era of commercial development, technological progress, and territorial expansion. Emerson suggested that a progressive new generation—the Young Americans— would lead this surge of physical development. More than a slogan and less than an organized movement, Young America stood for a positive attitude toward the market economy and industrial growth, a more aggressive and belligerent foreign policy, and a celebration of America’s unique strengths and virtues. Young Americans favored enlarging the national market by acquiring new territory. They called for the annexation of Texas, asserted an American claim to all of Oregon, and urged the appropriation of vast new territories from Mexico. They also celebrated the technological advances that would knit this new empire together, especially the telegraph and the railroad. Telegraphs, according to one writer, would “flash sensation and volition . . . to and from towns and provinces as if they were organs and limbs of a single organism”; railroads would provide “a vast system of iron muscles which, as it were, move the limbs of the mighty organism.” Young America was a cultural and intellectual movement as well as an economic and political one.

 In 1845, a Washington journal hailed the election of the 49-year-old James K. Polk, at that time the youngest man to have been elected president, as a sign that youth will “dare to take antiquity by the beard, and tear the cloak from hoary-headed hypocrisy. Too young to be corrupt . . . it is Young America, awakened to a sense of her own intellectual greatness by her soaring spirit. It stands in strength, the voice of the majority.” During the Polk administration, Young American writers and critics—mostly based in New York City—called for a new and distinctive national literature, free of subservience to European themes or models and expressive of the democratic spirit. Their organ was the Literary World, founded in 1847, and its ideals influenced two of the greatest writers America has produced: Walt Whitman and Herman Melville. Whitman captured much of the exuberance and expansionism of Young America in his “Song of the Open Road”: From this hour I ordain myself loos’d of limits and imaginary lines, Going where I list, my own master total and absolute, ............................. I inhale great draughts of space, The east and the west are mine, and the north and the south are mine. I am larger, better than I thought.

 other things—the dangers facing a nation that was overreaching itself by indulging its pride and exalted sense of destiny with too little concern for the moral and practical consequences. he Young American ideal—the idea of a young country led by young men into new paths of prosperity and greatness—appealed to many people and found support across political party lines. But the attitude came to be identified primarily with young Democrats who wanted to move their party away from its traditional fear of the expansion of commerce and industry. Unlike old-line Jeffersonians and Jacksonians, Young Americans had no qualms about the market economy and the speculative, materialistic spirit it called forth. Before 1848, the Young American impulse focused mainly on the great expanse of western lands that lay just beyond the nation’s borders. After the Mexican-American War, when territorial gains extended the nation’s boundaries from the Atlantic to the Pacific, attention shifted to internal development. New discoveries of gold in the nation’s western territories fostered economic growth, technological advances spurred industrialization, and increased immigration brought more people to populate the lands newly acquired— by agreement or by force.

T


Movement to the
Far West
 What were some of the reasons for which Americans headed into the Western territories, and what were some of the consequences of expansion? In the 1830s and 1840s, pioneers pursued fertile land and economic opportunity beyond the existing boundaries of the United States and thus helped set the stage for the annexations and international crises of the 1840s. Some went for material gain, others went for adventure, and a significant minority sought freedom from religious persecution.

 Walt Whitman in the “carpenter portrait” that appeared in the first edition of his great work, Leaves of Grass, in 1855. The poet’s rough clothes and slouch hat signify his identification with the common people.

 In Moby-Dick, Herman Melville produced a novel sufficiently original in form and conception to more than fulfill the demand of Young Americans for “a New Literature to fit the New Man in the New Age.” But Melville was too deep a thinker not to see the perils that underlay the soaring ambition and aggressiveness of the new age. The whaling captain Ahab, who brings destruction to himself and his ship by his relentless pursuit of the white whale, symbolized—among

 Borderlands of the 1830s Since the birth of the republic, there had been a major dispute over the boundary between Maine and the Canadian province of New Brunswick. In 1839, fighting broke out between Canadian lumberjacks and the Maine militia. In 1842, Secretary of State Daniel Webster concluded an agreement with the British government,



 CHAPTER 13

AN AGE OF EXPANSIONISM

View the Map


 United States Territorial Expansion in the 1850s

Ceded by U.S.


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

 WASH.

OREGON COUNTRY

Ceded by Great Britain, 1842
(Webster-Ashburton Treaty)
 MAINE

Ceded by
Great Britain
N. DAK.

 MONT.

VT. N.H.

MINN. ORE.

S. DAK. IDAHO WYO.

LOUISIANA PURCHASE

N.J.


 IOWA

 KANS.

 IND.

MO. KY.

 ARIZ.

PA C I F I C OCEAN

Dis
 put e untd with il 1 848 Mex ic

 o

 CALIF.

W.
 VA.

D.C.
 VA.

 DEL.

UNITED STATES N.C.

TENN. OKLA.

N. MEX.

TEXAS ANNEXATION

GADSDEN PURCHASE

 MD.

OHIO ILL.

 COLO.

R.I.
 CONN.

 PA.

 UTAH

MEXICAN CESSION

 MASS.

 MICH.

 NEBR.

 NEV.

 Map shows present-day state boundaries

N.Y.


 WIS.

S.C.


ARK. MISS.

 ALA.

 GA.

LA. FLA.

 TEXAS

 MEXICO

AT L A N T I C OCEAN

Ceded by
Spain
1819 0


1810 1812
Annexed by U.S.


Ceded by Spain, 1819
Ratified by U.S., 1821


 400 miles

 400 kilometers

TERRITORIAL EXPANSION BY THE MID-NINETEENTH CENTURY

 Fervent nationalists identified the growth of America through territorial expansion as the divinely ordained “Manifest Destiny” of a chosen people.

 represented by Lord Ashburton. The Webster-Ashburton Treaty gave over half of the disputed territory to the United States and established a definite northeastern boundary with Canada. On the other side of the continent, the United States and Britain both laid claim to Oregon, a vast area that lay between the Rockies and the Pacific from the 42nd parallel (the northern boundary of California) to the latitude of 54°0' (the southern boundary of Alaska). In 1818, the two nations agreed to joint occupation for ten years, an agreement that was renewed indefinitely in 1827. Meanwhile, the Americans had strengthened their claim by acquiring Spain’s rights to the Pacific Northwest in the Adams-Onís Treaty (see Chapter 9), and the British had gained effective control of the northern portion of the Oregon Country through the activities of the Hudson’s Bay Company, a well-financed fur-trading concern. Blocking an equitable division was the reluctance on both sides to surrender access to the Columbia River basin and the adjacent territory extending north to the 49th parallel (the future northern border of the state of Washington). The Oregon Country was scarcely populated before 1840. The same could not be said of the Mexican borderlands that lay directly west of Jacksonian America. Spanish settlements in present-day New Mexico date from the late sixteenth century. By 1820, about forty thousand people of Spanish descent populated this province, engaging mainly in sheep raising and mining. In 1821, Spain granted independence to Mexico, which then

 embraced areas that currently make up the states of Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, California, Nevada, Utah, and much of Colorado. The Republic of Mexico opted for a more open trade policy than its predecessor and in 1821 informed its northern neighbors of the changed laws encouraging trade. California was the other major northward extension of Mexico. Spanish missionaries and soldiers had taken control of the region in the late eighteenth century. In the 1820s and 1830s, this land of huge estates and enormous cattle herds was far less populous than New Mexico—only about four thousand Mexicans of Spanish origin lived in California in 1827. Of the region’s thirty thousand Indians, many were forced to work on vast land tracts owned by Spanish missions. At the beginning of the 1830s, a chain of twenty-one mission stations, stretching from San Diego to Sonoma, north of San Francisco, controlled most of the province’s land and wealth. The Indian population may seem large, yet the number represented only a small fraction of the original indigenous population; there had been a catastrophic decline in Indian population during the previous sixty years of Spanish rule. The stresses and strains of forced labor and exposure to European diseases had taken an enormous toll. In 1833, the Mexican Congress’s “secularization act” emancipated the Indians from church control and opened the mission lands to settlement. The government awarded immense tracts of the mission land to Mexican citizens and left the Indians landless.

Movement to the Far West


 A new class of large landowners, or rancheros, replaced the padres as rulers of Old California and masters of the province’s indigenous population. Seven hundred grantees took possession of ranchos ranging up to nearly 50,000 acres and proceeded to subject the Indians to a new and even harsher form of servitude. During the fifteen years they held sway, the rancheros created an American legend and aroused American envy through their lavish hospitality, extravagant dress, superb horsemanship, and taste for violent and dangerous sports. The Americans who saw California in the 1830s were mostly merchants and sailors involved in the oceanic trade between Boston and California ports. New England clipper ships sailed around Cape Horn at the southern tip of South America to barter manufactured goods for cowhides. By the mid-1830s, several Yankee merchants had taken up permanent residence in towns such as Monterey and San Diego in order to conduct the California end of the business.

The Texas Revolution
 At the same time as some Americans were trading with California, others were taking possession of Texas. In the early 1820s, Mexican officials encouraged settlers from the United States to settle in Texas. Newly independent Mexico granted Stephen F. Austin, son of a onetime Spanish citizen, a huge piece of land in hopes he would help attract and settle new colonists from the United States. Some fifteen other Anglo-American empresarios received land grants in the 1820s. In 1823, three hundred American families were settled on the Austin grant, and within a year, the colony’s population had swelled to 2021.



 Friction soon developed between the Mexican government and the Anglo-American colonists over the status of slavery and the authority of the Catholic Church. At its core, the dispute centered on the unwillingness of Anglo-American settlers to become Mexicans. Under the terms of settlement, all people living in Texas had to become Mexican citizens and adopt the Roman Catholic faith. Slavery presented another problem, for in 1829 Mexico freed all slaves under its jurisdiction. Slaveholders in Texas were given a special exemption that allowed them to emancipate their slaves and then force them to sign lifelong contracts as indentured servants, but many refused to limit their ownership rights in any way. Settlers either converted to Catholicism only superficially or ignored the requirement entirely. A Mexican government commission reported in 1829 that Americans were the great majority of the Texas population and were flagrantly violating Mexican law. The following year, the Mexican Congress prohibited further American immigration and importation of slaves to Texas. Enforcement of the new law was feeble, and the flow of settlers, slaves, and smuggled goods continued virtually unabated. A longstanding complaint of the Texans was the failure of the Mexican constitution to grant them local self-government. Under the Mexican federal system, Texas was joined to the state of Coahuila, and Texan representatives were outnumbered three to one in the state legislature. In 1832, the colonists showed their displeasure with Mexican rule by rioting in protest against the arrest of several Anglo-Americans by a Mexican commander.

 Battle of San Jacinto by H.A. McArdle. In this panorama of the Texas Revolution’s decisive battle at San Jacinto, Sam Houston leads the charge against Santa Anna’s forces.



 CHAPTER 13

AN AGE OF EXPANSIONISM

The Republic of Texas
 Meanwhile, delegates from the American communities in Texas convened and after some hesitation voted overwhelmingly to declare their independence on March 2, 1836. A constitution, based closely on that of the United States, was adopted for the new Republic of Texas, and a temporary government was installed to carry on the military struggle. Although the ensuing conflict was largely one of Americans against Mexicans, some Texas Mexicans, or Tejanos, sided with the Anglo rebels. They too wanted to be free of Santa Anna’s heavy-handed rule, though, they would later become victims of the same antiMexican prejudice that spurred the revolt. Tejano leader Juan Seguin, who served as a captain in the Texas army and became a hero of the independence struggle, was driven off his land by Anglo-Texans in 1841. Within days after Texas declared itself a republic, rebels and Mexican troops in San Antonio fought the famous battle of the Alamo. Myths about that battle have magnified the Anglo rebels’ valor at the Mexicans’ expense. The folklore is based on fact—only

View the Map


A da
 ms-O nís Br az os

Texas Revolution, 1836


Treaty of 1819


ARKANSAS R.

 REPUBLIC

 OF

Disputed Area
Alamo
March 6, 1836
San Antonio
Dec. 10, 1835
Gonzales
Oct. 2, 1835
 Goliad massacre March 20, 1836 eces R M E X I C O Nu .

TEXAS
Washingtonon-the-Brazos San Jacinto April 21, 1836 Anahuac San captured June 30, 1835 Felipe Galveston de Austin Velasco Gulf of Mexico Refugio March 14, Texan victories Mexican victories 
 o Ri

 In 1834, General Antonio López de Santa Anna made himself dictator of Mexico and abolished the federal system of government. News of these developments reached Texas late in the year, accompanied by rumors of the impending disfranchisement and even expulsion of American immigrants, threatening Texans’ status as “tolerated guests.” In 1835, some Texans revolted against Mexico’s central government. While the insurrectionists claimed they were fighting for freedom from oppression, Mexican rule had not been harsh; the worst that can be said was that it was inefficient, inconsistent, and sometimes corrupt. Furthermore, the Texans’ devotion to “liberty” did not prevent them from defending slavery against Mexico’s attempt to abolish it. The rebels, aroused by the rumors of what the new Mexican government had in store for them, prepared to resist Santa Anna’s effort to enforce tariff regulations by military force. When he learned that Texans were resisting customs collections, Santa Anna sent reinforcements. The settlers first engaged Mexican troops at Gonzales in October and forced the retreat of a cavalry detachment. Shortly thereafter, Austin laid siege to San Antonio with a force of five hundred men and after six weeks forced its surrender, thereby capturing most of the Mexican troops then in Texas. After entering Texas to quell the unrest, Santa Anna issued his “Message to the Inhabitants of Texas.” Santa Anna promised that his troops would respect the “persons and property” of those who were not “implicated in such iniquitous rebellion.” But such a message really wasn’t intended for all of the “Inhabitants” of Texas. Even before Texas had won its independence, Santa Anna recognized the driving presence of the United States in the territory’s Anglo-American inhabitants, and the difficulty of assimilating that population into Mexico. Santa Anna declared the root of the rebellion to be “adventurers, maliciously protected by some inhabitants of a neighboring republic” who had planned to attack Mexico City. It was remarkable foreshadowing of the Mexican-American War that would begin 10 years later.

Gr
 an de





 100 miles

 0 50 100 kilometers

TEXAS REVOLUTION

 Major battles of the Texas Revolution. The Texans suffered severe losses at the Alamo and Goliad, but they scored a stunning victory at San Jacinto.

 187 rebels fought off a far larger number of Mexican soldiers for more than a week before eventually capitulating—but it is not true that all rebels, including the folk hero Davy Crockett, fought to the death. Crockett and seven other survivors were captured and then executed. Nevertheless, a tale that combined actual and mythical bravery inside the Alamo gave the insurrection new inspiration, moral sanction, outside support, and the rallying cry “Remember the Alamo.” The revolt ended with an exchange of slaughters. A few days after the Alamo battle, another Texas detachment was surrounded and captured in an open plain near the San Antonio River and was marched to the town of Goliad, where most of its three hundred and fifty members were executed. The next month, on April 21, 1836, the main Texas army, under General Sam Houston, assaulted Santa Anna’s troops at an encampment near the San Jacinto River during the siesta hour. The final count showed that six hundred and thirty Mexicans and only a handful of Texans had been killed. Santa Anna was captured and marched to Velasco, the meeting place of the Texas government, where he was forced to sign treaties recognizing the independence of Texas and its claim to territory all the way to the Rio Grande. The Mexican Congress failed to repudiate the treaty; although a strip of land between the Nueces River and the Rio Grande would be disputed during the next decade, Mexico failed to impose its authority on the victorious Texas rebels. Sam Houston, the hero of San Jacinto, became the first president of Texas. His platform sought annexation to the United States,

Movement to the Far West


 and one of his first acts in office was to send an emissary to Washington to test the waters. Houston’s agent found much sympathy for Texas independence but was told by Andrew Jackson and others that domestic politics and fear of a war with Mexico made immediate annexation impossible. The most that he could win from Congress and the Jackson administration was formal recognition of Texas sovereignty. In its ten-year existence as the Lone Star Republic, Texas drew settlers from the United States at an accelerating rate, the population growing from 30,000 to 142,000. The Panic of 1837 impelled many debt-ridden and land-hungry farmers to take advantage of the free grants of 1280 acres that Texas offered to immigrating heads of white families. Most of the newcomers assumed, as did the old settlers, that they would soon be annexed and restored to American citizenship.

Trails of Trade and Settlement
 After New Mexico opened its trade to American merchants, a thriving commerce developed between Missouri and Santa Fe. The first of the merchants to reach the New Mexican capital was William Becknell, who arrived with his train of goods late in 1821. Others followed rapidly. For protection from hostile Indians, traders traveled in large caravans, one or two of which would arrive in Santa Fe every summer. The federal government assisted them by providing troops when necessary and by appropriating money to purchase rights of passage from various tribes. But profits from the exchange of textiles and other manufactured goods for furs, mules, and precious metals were substantial enough to make the risky trip worth taking. Relations between the United States and Mexico soured following the Texas revolution and further Anglo-American aggressions, both having devastating effects on the Santa Fe trade. An expedition of Texas businessmen and soldiers to Santa Fe in 1841 alarmed the Mexican authorities, who arrested its members. In retaliation, a volunteer force of Texas avengers attacked Mexican troops along the Santa Fe Trail. The Mexican government then moved to curtail the Santa Fe trade. In April 1842, it passed a new tariff banning the importation of many of the goods sold by American merchants and prohibiting the export of gold and silver. Further restrictions in 1843 denied American traders full access to the Santa Fe market. The famous Oregon Trail was the great overland route that brought the wagon trains of American migrants to the West Coast during the 1840s. Extending for two thousand miles, across the northern Great Plains and the mountains beyond, it crossed the Rockies at South Pass and then forked; the main northern route led to the Willamette Valley of Oregon, but alternative trails were opened during the decade for overlanders heading for California. The journey from Missouri to the West Coast took about six months. After small groups had made their way to both Oregon and California in 1841 and 1842, a mass migration—mostly to Oregon—began in 1843. Within two years, five thousand Americans, living in the Willamette Valley south of the Columbia River, were demanding the extension of full American sovereignty over the Oregon Country.



The Mormon Trek
 An important and distinctive group of pioneers followed the Oregon Trail as far as South Pass and then veered southwestward to establish a thriving colony in the region of the Great Salt Lake. These were Mormons, members of the largest religious denomination founded on American soil—the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The background of the Mormon trek was a history of persecution in the eastern states. Joseph Smith of Palmyra, New York, the founder of Mormonism, revealed in 1830 that he had received over many years a series of revelations that called upon him to establish Christ’s pure church on Earth. As the prophet of this faith, he published the Book of Mormon, a new scripture that he claimed to have discovered and translated with the aid of an angel. It was the record of a community of pious Jews who left the Holy Land six centuries before the birth of Christ and sailed to the American continent. After his crucifixion and resurrection, Christ appeared to this community and proclaimed the Gospel. Four hundred years later, a fratricidal war annihilated the believing Christians but not all of the descendents of the original Jewish migrants. Mormons held that the survivors had contributed to the ancestry of the American Indians. Smith and those he converted to his new faith were committed to restoring the pure religion that had once thrived on American soil by founding a western Zion where they could practice their faith unmolested and carry out their special mission to convert the Native Americans. In the 1830s, the Mormons established communities in Ohio and Missouri, but the former went bankrupt in the Panic of 1837 and the latter was the target of angry mobs and vigilante violence. After the Mormons lost the “war” they fought against the Missourians in 1839, Smith led his followers back across the Mississippi to Illinois, where he received a liberal charter from the state legislature to found a town at Nauvoo. Here the Mormons had a temporary measure of security and self-government, but Smith soon reported new revelations that engendered dissension among his followers and hostility from neighboring “gentiles.” Most controversial was his authorization of polygamy, or plural marriage. In 1844, Smith was killed by a mob while being held in jail in Carthage, Illinois, on a charge stemming from his quarrels with dissident Mormons who objected to his new policies. The death of Smith confirmed the growing conviction of the Mormon leadership that they needed to move beyond the borders of the United States to establish their Zion in the wilderness. In late 1845, Smith’s successor, Brigham Young, decided to send a party of fifteen hundred men to assess the chances of a colony in the vicinity of the Great Salt Lake (then part of Mexico). Nauvoo was quickly depopulated as twelve thousand Mormons took to the trail in 1846. The following year, Young himself arrived in Utah and sent back word to the thousands encamped along the trail that he had found the promised land. The Mormon community that Young established in Utah is one of the great success stories of western settlement. In contrast to the rugged individualism and disorder that often characterized mining camps and other new communities, “the state of Deseret” (the name the Mormons originally applied to Utah) was a model of discipline and cooperation. Because of its communitarian form of social organization, its centralized government, and the

 CHAPTER 13

AN AGE OF EXPANSIONISM

TR AIL

 TREK

 Nauvoo IND. ILL.

MO.
Independence 
SANTA FE TRAIL

.


R


Santa Fe


N


Ri


 o

E


 e

 n

 re aw

.L


D.C.
 VA.

S.C.


ARK. MISS.

ATLANTIC OCEAN

 GA.

 ALA.

 LA.

 an

X


FLA. TERR.

 de

I
C


O


 Map shows 1840 boundaries

N.J.
 DEL.

N.C.


 TEXAS

 r

Ohio


 MD.

 KY.

M
G


 OHIO

 TENN.

S


IA PACIFIC OCEAN

PA. MORMO N

 AIN

FO
San Diego 
 MICH.

R.


.


 pi

R


 WIS.

 s s TERR. ip

 PL

 do

 MTS

LI
Co 
 a lor

T


Salt Lake
City


 si

 EA

O


RE GO N

R


Y


 IL

South Pass


 is

 MAINE

VT. N.H. MASS. N.Y. R.I. CONN.

 s

G


 CK

A
 TR

L
AI TR NIA R O F I CAL

 CA

 Sutter’s Fort San Francisco Monterey

IOWA TERR.

 k

 e

 RO

ON O RE G

Willamette R.


M


La


 c

St


Columbia R.


Oregon City


Gre
 at

 uri R. Misso

R.


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

OREGON COUNTRY

R.








 500 miles

 500 kilometers

WESTERN TRAILS
Among the greatest hazards faced by those migrating to the West was the rough and unfamiliar terrain over which their wagon trains traveled. religious dedication of its inhabitants, this frontier society was able to expand settlement in a planned and efficient way and develop a system of irrigation that “made the desert bloom.” Utah’s main problem was the determination of its political status. When the Mormons first arrived, they were encroaching illegally into Mexican territory. After Utah came under American sovereignty in 1848, the state of Deseret fought to maintain its autonomy and its custom of polygamy against the efforts of the federal government to extend American law and set up the usual type of territorial administration. In 1857, President Buchanan sent a military force to bring Utah to heel, and the Mormons prepared to repel this “invasion.” But after a heavy snow prevented the army from crossing the Rockies, Buchanan offered an olive branch in the form of a general pardon for Mormons who had violated federal law but agreed to cooperate with U.S. authorities in the future. The Mormons accepted, and in return, Brigham Young called off his plan to resist the army by force and accepted the nominal authority of an appointed territorial governor. 
Manifest Destiny and the
Mexican-American War
 Why did the U.S. annex Texas and the Southwest? The rush of settlers beyond the nation’s borders in the 1830s and 1840s inspired politicians and propagandists to call for annexation of those areas occupied by migrants. Some went further and proclaimed it was the Manifest Destiny of the United States to expand until it had absorbed all of North America, including Canada and Mexico. Such ambitions led to a major diplomatic confrontation with Great Britain and a war with Mexico.

Tyler and Texas
 President John Tyler initiated the politics of Manifest Destiny. He was vice president when William Henry Harrison died in office in 1841 after serving scarcely a month. The first of America’s “accidental presidents,” Tyler was a states’ rights, proslavery Virginian who had been picked as Harrison’s running mate to broaden the appeal of the Whig ticket. Profoundly out of sympathy with the mainstream of his own party, he soon broke with the Whigs in Congress, who had united behind the latest version of Henry Clay’s “American System.” Although Tyler lacked a base in either of the major parties, he hoped to be elected president in his own right in 1844. To accomplish this difficult feat, he needed a new issue around which he could build a following that would cut across established party lines. In 1843, Tyler decided to put the full weight of his administration behind the annexation of Texas. He anticipated that its incorporation would be a popular move, especially in the South where it would feed the appetite for additional slave states. With the South solidly behind him, Tyler expected to have a good chance in the election of 1844. To achieve his objective, Tyler enlisted the support of John C. Calhoun, the leading political defender of slavery and state sovereignty. Calhoun saw the annexation issue as a way of uniting the South and taking the offensive against the abolitionists. Success or failure in this effort would constitute a decisive test of whether the North was willing to give the southern states a fair share of national power and adequate assurances for the future of their way of life. If antislavery sentiment succeeded in blocking the acquisition of Texas, the Southerners would at least know where they stood and could begin to “calculate the value of the union.” To prepare the public for annexation, the Tyler administration launched a propaganda campaign in the summer of 1843 based on

Manifest Destiny and the Mexican-American War




THE LIBERTY PARTY SWINGS AN ELECTION
Candidate Polk Clay Birney 
Party
Democratic
Whig
Liberty


Actual Vote in
New York
237,588
232,482
15,812


National
Electoral Vote


If Liberty Voters
Had Voted Whig
237,588
248,294
—


Projected
Electoral Vote
—


 reports of British designs on Texas. It is doubtful the British had party division seemed confirmed in 1844 when the dominant such intentions, but the stories were believed and used to give party faction in Van Buren’s home state of New York came out urgency to the annexation cause. against Tyler’s Texas policy. In an effort to keep the issue out of Secretary of State Abel Upshur, a proslavery Virginian and the campaign, Van Buren struck a gentleman’s agreement with protégé of Calhoun, began negotiating an annexation treaty. After Henry Clay, the overwhelming favorite for the Whig nomination, Upshur was killed in an accident, Calhoun replaced him and carried that both of them would publicly oppose immediate annexation. the negotiations to a successful conclusion. When the treaty was Van Buren’s letter opposing annexation appeared shortly brought before the Senate in 1844, Calhoun denounced the British before the Democratic convention, costing him the nomination. for attempting to subvert the South’s essential system of labor and Angry southern delegates, who secured a rule requiring approval racial control by using Texas as a base for abolitionist operations. by a two-thirds vote, blocked Van Buren’s nomination. After sevAccording to the supporters of Tyler and Calhoun, the South’s secueral ballots, a dark horse candidate—James K. Polk of Tennessee— rity and well-being—and by extension that of the nation—required emerged triumphant. Polk, a protégé of Andrew Jackson, had been the immediate incorporation of Texas into the Union. speaker of the House of Representatives and governor of Tennessee. The strategy of linking annexation explicitly to the interests An avowed expansionist, Polk ran on a platform calling for the of the South and slavery led northern antislavery Whigs to charge simultaneous annexation of Texas and assertion of American claims that the whole scheme was a proslavery plot to advance the interto all of Oregon. He identified himself and his party with the popular est of the South. The Senate rejected the treaty by a decisive vote cause of turning the United States into a continental nation, an of 35 to 16 in June 1844. Though Tyler then attempted to bring aspiration that attracted support from all parts of the country. His was Texas into the Union through a joint resolution of both houses of Congress admitting it as a state, Congress adjourned before the issue Watch the Video The Annexation of Texas came to a vote, and the whole question hung fire in anticipation of the election of 1844.

The Triumph of Polk and
Annexation
 Tyler’s initiative made the future of Texas the central issue in the 1844 campaign. But party lines held firm, and the president himself was unable to capitalize on the issue because his stand was not in line with the views of either party. Tyler tried to run as an independent, but his failure to gain significant support eventually forced him to withdraw from the race. If the Democratic party convention had been held in 1843—as it was originally scheduled—ex-President Martin Van Buren would have won the nomination. But postponement of the Democratic conclave until May 1844 weakened his chances. In the meantime, the annexation question came to the fore, and Van Buren was forced to take a stand on it. He persisted in the view he had held as president—that incorporation of Texas would risk war with Mexico, arouse sectional strife, and destroy the unity of the Democratic party. Fears of sectional and

 Texans voted in favor of annexation to the United States in the first election following independence in 1836. However, throughout the Republic period (1836-1845) no treaty of annexation negotiated between the Republic and the United States was ratified by both nations.



 CHAPTER 13

AN AGE OF EXPANSIONISM

 a much more astute political strategy than the overtly prosouthern expansionism advocated by Tyler and Calhoun. The Whig nominee, Henry Clay, was basically antiexpansionist, but his sense of the growing popularity of Texas annexation among southern Whigs caused him to waffle on the issue during the campaign. This vacillation in turn cost Clay the support of a small but crucial group of northern antislavery Whigs, who defected to the abolitionist Liberty party. Polk won the fall election by a relatively narrow popular margin. His triumph in the electoral college—170 votes to 105— was secured by victories in New York and Michigan, where the Liberty party candidate, James G. Birney, had taken away enough votes from Clay to affect the outcome. The closeness of the election meant the Democrats had something less than a clear mandate to implement their expansionist policies, but this did not prevent them from claiming that the people backed border expansion. After the election, Congress reconvened to consider the annexation of Texas. The mood had changed as a result of Polk’s victory, and some leading senators from both parties who had initially opposed Tyler’s scheme for annexation by joint resolution of Congress now changed their position. As a result, annexation was approved a few days before Polk took office.

Read the Document


 John O’Sullivan was editor of the United States Magazine and Democratic Review. He advocated the view that the United States was destined to expand. In the process, he coined the phrase “Manifest Destiny.” His vision caught the imagination of the immigrant nation searching for its identity and meaning as well as a definition of success.

THE ELECTION OF 1844
Candidate Polk Clay Birney 
John O’Sullivan, “The Great Nation of


Futurity” (1845)


Party
Popular Vote Electoral Vote
Democratic 1,338,464
Whig
1,300,097
Liberty
62,300
—


The Doctrine of Manifest Destiny
 The expansionist mood that accompanied Polk’s election and the annexation of Texas was given a name and a rationale in the summer of 1845. John L. O’Sullivan, a proponent of the Young America movement and editor of the influential United States Magazine and Democratic Review, charged that foreign governments were conspiring to block the annexation of Texas in an effort to thwart “the fulfillment of our manifest destiny to overspread the continent allotted by providence for the free development of our yearly multiplying millions.” Besides coining the phrase Manifest Destiny, O’Sullivan pointed to the three main ideas that lay behind it. One was that God was on the side of American expansionism. This notion came naturally out of the tradition, going back to the New England Puritans, that identified the growth of America with the divinely ordained success of a chosen people. A second idea,

 implied in the phrase free development, was that the spread of American rule meant what other propagandists for expansion described as “extending the area of freedom.” Democratic institutions and local self-government would follow the flag if areas claimed by autocratic foreign governments were annexed to the United States. O’Sullivan’s third premise was that population growth required the outlet that territorial acquisitions would provide. Behind this notion lurked a fear that growing numbers would lead to diminished opportunity and a European-type polarization of social classes if the restless and the ambitious were not given new lands to settle and exploit. In its most extreme form, the doctrine of Manifest Destiny meant that the United States would someday occupy the entire North American continent. “Make way, I say, for the young American Buffalo,” bellowed a Democratic orator in 1844, “—he has not yet got land enough . . . . I tell you we will give him Oregon for his summer shade, and the region of Texas as his winter pasture. (Applause) Like all of his race, he wants salt, too. Well, he shall have the use of two oceans—the mighty Pacific and the turbulent Atlantic . . . . He shall not stop his career until he slakes his thirst in the frozen ocean. (Cheers)”

Polk and the Oregon Question
 In 1845 and 1846, the United States came closer to armed conflict with Great Britain than at any time since the War of 1812. The willingness of some Americans to go to war over

Manifest Destiny and the Mexican-American War


Alaska
(Russ.)


Treaty
 of 1825

54°4


0'


 nt Co

 ine

 a nt lD

 ivi de

North


 r ve ou nc Va

49°


OREGON
Treaty of 
I.


Latitu
 de

Treaty of 1818
(Anglo-American Convention)


 COUNTRY

Puget Sound


PA C I F I C OCEAN



BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

 Joint U.S.–British occupation of disputed territory 1818–1846 Columbia R.

UNITED STATES

Willamette Valley
 Main area of U.S. settlement

42°






 300 miles

 300 kilometers

 Adams-Onís Tre aty of 1819

 MEXICO

NORTHWEST BOUNDARY DISPUTE

President
 Polk’s policy of bluff and bluster nearly involved the United States in a war with Great Britain over the disputed boundary in Oregon.

 Oregon was expressed in the rallying cry “Fifty-four forty or fight” (referring to the latitude of the northern boundary of the desired territory). This slogan was actually coined by Whigs seeking to ridicule Democratic expansionists, but Democrats later took it over as a vivid expression of their demand for what is now British Columbia. Polk fed this expansionist fever by laying claim in his inaugural address to all of the Oregon Country, then jointly occupied by Britain and the United States. Privately, he was willing to accept the 49th parallel as a dividing line. What made the situation so tense was that Polk was dedicated to an aggressive diplomacy of bluff and bluster, convinced that his foreign adversaries would only respond to a hard-line approach. In July 1845, Polk authorized Secretary of State James Buchanan to reply to the latest British request for terms by offering a boundary along the 49th parallel. When the British ambassador rejected this proposal, Polk angrily withdrew it and refused to renew it when the British sought to reopen negotiations. In April 1846, Congress terminated the agreement for joint occupation of the Pacific Northwest at Polk’s request The British government then took the initiative, submitting a new treaty proposal and dispatching warships at the same time. When the draft treaty was received in June, Polk refused either to endorse or reject it and took the unusual step of submitting it directly to the Senate for advice, which recommended its acceptance almost without change. It was ratified on June 15. Polk was prompted to settle the Oregon question because he now had a war with Mexico on his hands. American policy makers got what they wanted from the Oregon treaty, namely Puget Sound, a splendid natural harbor and the first U.S. deepwater port on the Pacific. Polk’s initial demand for all of Oregon was made partly for domestic political consumption and partly



 to bluff the British into making more concessions. It was a dangerous game on both fronts. When Polk finally agreed to the solution, he alienated expansionist advocates in the Old Northwest who had supported his call for “all of Oregon.” For many Northerners, the promise of new acquisitions in the Pacific Northwest was the only thing that made annexation of Texas palatable. They hoped new free states could be created to counterbalance the admission of slaveholding Texas to the Union. As this prospect receded, the charge of antislavery advocates that Texas annexation was a southern plot became more believable; to Northerners, Polk began to look more and more like a president concerned mainly with furthering the interests of his native region.

 War with Mexico While the United States was avoiding a war with Great Britain, it was getting into one with Mexico. Although the Mexicans had recognized Texas independence in 1845, they rejected the Lone Star Republic’s dubious claim to the unsettled territory between the Nueces River and the Rio Grande. When the United States annexed Texas and assumed its claim to the disputed area, Mexico broke off diplomatic relations and prepared for armed conflict.

 This 1846 cartoon titled “This Is the House That Polk Built” shows President Polk sitting forlornly in a house of cards, which represents the delicately balanced issues facing him.



 CHAPTER 13

AN AGE OF EXPANSIONISM

 Polk responded by placing troops in Louisiana on the alert because the Mexicans refused to make peace despite a succession and by dispatching John Slidell as an emissary to Mexico City of military defeats. In the first major campaign of the conin the hope he could resolve the boundary dispute and also perflict, Taylor followed up his victory in two battles fought north suade the Mexicans to sell New Mexico and California to the of the Rio Grande by crossing the river, taking Matamoros, and United States. The Mexican government refused to receive Slidell marching on Monterrey. In September, his forces assaulted and because the nature of his appointment ignored the fact that captured this major city of northern Mexico after overcoming regular diplomatic relations were suspended. While Slidell was fierce resistance. cooling his heels in Mexico City in January 1846, Polk ordered Taylor’s controversial decision to allow the Mexican General Zachary Taylor, commander of American forces in the garrison to go free and his unwillingness or inability to advance Southwest, to advance well beyond the Nueces and proceed farther into Mexico angered Polk and led him to adopt a new toward the Rio Grande, thus encroaching on territory claimed strategy for winning the war and a new commander to impleby both sides. ment it. General Winfield Scott was ordered to prepare an By April, Taylor had taken up a position near Matamoros amphibious attack on Veracruz with the aim of placing an on the Rio Grande. On the opposite bank of the river, Mexican American army within striking distance of Mexico City itself. forces had assembled and erected a fort. On April 24, sixteen With half his forces detached for the new invasion, Taylor was hundred Mexican soldiers crossed the river and the followleft to hold his position in northern Mexico. At Buena Vista, ing day met and attacked a small American detachment, killin February 1847, he claimed victory over a sizable Mexican ing eleven and capturing the rest. After learning of the incident, army sent northward to dislodge him. Though unpopular with Taylor sent word to the president: “Hostilities,” he reported, the administration, Taylor was hailed as a national hero and a “may now be considered as commenced.” possible candidate for president. The news was neither unexpected nor unwelcome. Polk in Meanwhile, the Kearny expedition captured Santa Fe, fact was already preparing his war message to Congress when he proclaimed the annexation of New Mexico by the United States, learned of the fighting on the Rio Grande. A short and decisive and set off for California. There they found that American settlers, war, he had concluded, would force the cession of California and New Mexico to the United States. When Congress declared war on May 13, American agents and an “exploring expedition” under John C. Frémont were already in California stirring up dissension against Mexican rule, and ships of the U.S. Navy lay waiting expectantly off the shore. Two days later, Polk ordered a force under Colonel Stephen Kearny to march to Santa Fe and take possession of New Mexico. The war was fought almost entirely by volunteers, including a number of recent immigrants from Europe, especially Irish escaping the Potato Famine. Thousands of Irish had joined the army by 1845, where they encountered significant prejudice. Some were punished for refusing to participate in Protestant services. They also witnessed the purposeful destruction of Catholic churches and monuments during the invasion of Mexico. This led some of the immigrant soldiers to switch sides, including the famous “Batallion of San Patricio,” a group of Irish deserters who fought for the Mexican Army. In 1847, the U.S. Army hanged 16 surviving memHandkerchief depicting Major General Zachary Taylor in battle scenes from the Mexican War. When the bers of the San Patricios as traitors. They popular hero displeased President Polk with his actions in the capture of Monterrey, Winfield Scott was are still considered heroes in Mexico. appointed to carry out Polk’s plan for the attack on the port city of Veracruz, which led to the capture of The Mexican-American War Mexico City. lasted much longer than expected Source: Collection of The New-York Historical Society, 1941.129.

Manifest Destiny and the Mexican-American War


 in cooperation with John C. Frémont’s exploring expedition, had revolted against Mexican authorities and declared their independence as the Bear Flag Republic. The navy had also captured the port of Monterey. With the addition of Kearny’s troops, a relatively small number of Americans were able to take possession of California in early 1847 against scattered and disorganized Mexican opposition. The decisive Veracruz campaign was slow to develop because of the massive and careful preparations required. But in March 1847, the main American army under General Scott finally landed near that crucial port city and laid siege to it. Veracruz fell after eighteen days, and then Scott began his advance on Mexico City. In the most important single battle of the war, Scott met forces under General Santa Anna at Cerro Gordo on April 17 and 18. The Mexicans occupied an apparently impregnable position on high ground blocking the way to Mexico City. A daring flanking maneuver that required soldiers to scramble up the mountainsides enabled Scott to win the decisive victory that opened the road to the Mexican capital. By August, American troops were drawn up in front of Mexico City. After a temporary armistice, a brief respite that the Mexicans used to regroup and improve their defenses, Scott ordered the massive assault that captured the city on September 14.



Read the Document


Thomas Corwin, “Against
 the Mexican War” (1847)

 Settlement of the MexicanAmerican War Accompanying Scott’s army was a diplomat, Nicholas P. Trist, who was authorized to negotiate a peace treaty whenever the Mexicans decided they had had enough. Despite a sequence of American victories and the imminent fall of Mexico City, Trist made little progress. No Mexican leader was willing to invite the wrath of an intensely proud and patriotic citizenry by agreeing to the kind of terms that Polk wanted to impose. Even after the United States had achieved an overwhelming military victory, Trist found it difficult to exact an acceptable treaty from the Mexican government. In November, Polk ordered Trist to return to Washington. Radical adherents of Manifest Destiny were now clamoring for the annexation of all Mexico, and Polk himself may have been momentarily tempted by the chance to move from military occupation to outright annexation. Trist ignored Polk’s instructions and lingered in Mexico City. On February 2, 1848, he signed a treaty that gained all the concessions he had been commissioned to obtain. The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ceded New Mexico and California to the United States for $15 million, established the Rio Grande as the border between Texas and Mexico, and promised that the U.S. government would assume the substantial claims of American citizens against Mexico. The treaty also provided that the Mexican residents of the new territories would become U.S. citizens. When the agreement reached Washington, Polk censured Trist for disobeying orders but approved most of his treaty, which he sent to the Senate for ratification. Senate approval by a vote of 38 to 14 came on March 10. The United States gained 500,000 square miles of territory from Mexico. The treaty of 1848 enlarged the size of the nation by about 20 percent, adding to its domain the present states of

 Richard Caton Woodville’s War News from Mexico suggests the role of the newspaper in keeping the public informed of developments in the expanding nation’s quest for new territory. Source: War News from Mexico by Richard Caton Woodville,1848. Board of Trustees, National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC.

 California, Utah, New Mexico, Nevada, Arizona, and parts of Colorado and Wyoming. Soon those interested in a southern route for a transcontinental railroad pressed for even more territory along the southern border of the cession. That pressure led in 1853 to the Gadsden Purchase of the southernmost parts of present-day Arizona and New Mexico. But one intriguing question remains. Why, given the expansionist spirit of the age, did the campaign to acquire all of Mexico fail? According to historian Frederick Merk, a major factor was the peculiar combination of racism and anticolonialism that dominated American opinion. It was one thing to acquire thinly populated areas that could be settled by “Anglo-Saxon” pioneers. It was something else again to incorporate a large population that was mainly of mixed Spanish and Indian origin. These “mongrels,” charged racist opponents of the “All Mexico” movement, could never be fit citizens of a self-governing republic. They would have to be ruled in the way the British governed India, and the possession of colonial dependencies was contrary to American ideals and traditions.

 CHAPTER 13

AN AGE OF EXPANSIONISM

View the Map


Mexican-American War, 1846–1848


 ss Mi

OREGON COUNTRY

 ou ri R .

Bear Flag Revolt
June 14, 1846


Santa Fe
 occupied Aug. 16, 1846

M


San Diego


Kearny


Gila
R


El Brazito
Dec. 25, 1846


Wool


Taylor


Corpus
Christi
Palo Alto
May 8, 1846


Monterrey
Sept. 21–24, 1846


Gulf of
Mexico


Matamoros


O


 5 kilometers

 n ha ip

 5 miles



Scott


 on



Nueces R.


Buena Vista
Feb. 22–23, 1847
Mexico City
Churubusco
Aug. 20, 1847


 U.S. troop movements U.S. victories

Contreras
Aug. 20, 1847


New Orleans


 de

El Molino
 del Rey Sept. 8, 1847

R
 n Gra

Guadalupe Hidalgo
Chapultepec
Sept. 13, 1847


C


Detail Map


 ALA.

 LA.

 TEXAS

D


 400 kilometers

I




 ARK.

 io

X




 KY.

 MISS.

Chihuahua


 400 miles

.
 io R

 TENN. sR .

Red R.


Disputed
Area


E




 ns a

.


Sacramento River
Feb. 27, 1847


 MO.

Miss


San Gabriel
Jan. 8, 1847


Oh


 a Ark

 n kto Stoc

Co
 l

.


 oR ad or

San Pasqual
Dec. 6, 1846


PACIFIC OCEAN

 y arn Ke

 iR .

Monterey
 occupied July 7, 1846

 IND.

 ILL.

Ft. Leavenworth


San Francisco
 occupied July 10, 1846



 IOWA

UNORGANIZED TERRITORY

 issipp



Tampico
 occupied Nov. 14, 1846 Cerro Gordo April 17–18, 1847

 Mexican victories Boundary of territory ceded by Mexico, 1848

Mexico City
 (detail map)

Veracruz
 occupied Mar. 29, 1847

THE MEXICAN-AMERICAN WAR

 The Mexican-American War added half a million square miles of territory to the United States, but the cost was high: $100 million and thirteen thousand lives.

 Merk’s thesis sheds light on why the general public had little appetite for swallowing all of Mexico, but those actually making policy had more mundane and practical reasons for being satisfied with what was obtained at Guadalupe Hidalgo. What they had really wanted all along, historian Norman Graebner contended, were the great California harbors of San Francisco and San Diego. From these ports, Americans could trade directly with the Orient and dominate the commerce of the Pacific. Once acquisition of California had been assured, policy makers had little incentive to press for more Mexican territory. The war with Mexico divided the American public and provoked political dissension. A majority of the Whig party opposed the war in principle, arguing that the United States had no valid claims to the area south of the Nueces. Whig congressmen voted for military appropriations while the conflict was going on, but they constantly criticized the president for starting it. More ominous was the charge of some Northerners from both parties that the real purpose of the war was to spread the institution of

