Chapter 9 Nation Building and Nationalism


A
Revolutionary War Hero Revisits America in 1824
 When the Marquis de Lafayette returned to the United States in 1824 he found a peaceful and prosperous nation. For more than a year, the great French hero of the American Revolution toured the country that he had helped to bring into being, and he marveled at how much had changed since he had fought beside George Washington more than forty years before. He was greeted by adoring crowds in places that had been unsettled or beyond the nation’s borders four decades earlier. Besides covering the eastern seaboard, Lafayette went west to New Orleans, then up the Mississippi and Ohio rivers by steamboat. He thus sampled a new mode of transportation that was helping to bring the far-flung outposts and settlements of a much enlarged nation into regular contact with each other. Everywhere Lafayette was greeted with patriotic oratory celebrating the liberty, prosperity, and progress of the new nation. Speaking before a joint session of both houses of Congress, the old hero responded in kind, telling his hosts exactly what they wanted to hear. He hailed “the immense improvements” and “admirable communications” that he had witnessed and declared himself deeply moved by “all the grandeur and prosperity of these happy United States, which . . . reflect on

 every part of the world the light of a far superior political civilization.” Americans had good reasons to make Lafayette’s return the occasion for patriotic celebration and reaffirmation. Since the War of 1812, the nation had been free from serious foreign threats to its independence and way of life. It was growing rapidly in population, size, and wealth. Its republican form of government, which many had considered a risky experiment at the time of its origin, was apparently working well. James Monroe, the current president, had proclaimed in his first inaugural address that “the United States have flourished beyond example. Their citizens individually have been happy and the nation prosperous.” Expansion “to the Great Lakes and beyond the sources of the great rivers which communicate through our whole interior” meant that “no country was ever happier with respect to its domain.” As for the government, it was so near to perfection that “in respect to it we have no essential improvement to make.”

 eneath the optimism and self-confidence, however, lay undercurrents of doubt and anxiety about the future. The visit of the aged Lafayette signified the passing of the Founders. Less than a year after his departure, Jefferson and Adams died

B


Expansion and Migration




 An exuberant crowd celebrates in the square outside Independence Hall in this painting, Election Day in Philadelphia (1815), by German American artist John Lewis Krimmel. Source: Courtesy, The Winterthur Library: Printed Book and Periodical Collection.

 within hours of each other on the fiftieth anniversary of the Declaration of Independence, leaving Madison as the last of the great Founders. Some Americans asked whether the Founders’ example of republican virtue and self-sacrifice could be maintained in an increasingly prosperous and materialistic society. In fact, many believed public virtue had declined since the heroic age of the Revolution. And what about the place of black slavery in a “perfect” democratic republic? Lafayette himself noted with disappointment that the United States had not yet extended freedom to southern slaves. But the peace following the War of 1812 did open the way for a great surge of nation building. As new lands were acquired or opened up for settlement, hordes of pioneers often rushed in. Improvements in transportation soon gave many of them access to distant markets, and advances in the processing of raw materials led to the first stirrings of industrialization. Politicians looked for ways to encourage the process of growth and expansion, and an active judiciary handed down decisions that served to promote economic development and assert the priority of national over state and local interests. To guarantee the peace and security essential for internal progress, statesmen

 proclaimed a foreign policy designed to insulate America from external involvements. A new nation of great potential wealth and power was emerging.

Expansion and Migration
 What key forces drove American expansion westward during this period? The peace concluded with Great Britain in 1815 allowed Americans to shift their attention from Europe and the Atlantic to the vast lands of North America. The Rush-Bagot Agreement (1817) limited U.S. and British naval forces on the Great Lakes and Lake Champlain and guaranteed that the British would never try to invade the United States from Canada and that the United States would never try to take Canada from the British. The Anglo-American Convention of 1818 set the border between the lands of the Louisiana Purchase and Canada at the 49th parallel and provided for joint U.S. and British occupation of Oregon. Meanwhile, in the lower Mississippi Valley, the former French colony of Louisiana had been admitted as a state in 1812, and



 CHAPTER 9

NATION BUILDING AND NATIONALISM

 a thriving settlement existed around Natchez in the Mississippi Territory. Elsewhere in the trans-Appalachian west, white settlement was sparse and much land remained in Indian hands. U.S. citizens, eager to expand into lands held by Indian nations as well as Spain, used diplomacy, military action, force, and fraud to “open” lands for U.S. settlement and westward migration.

 General Andrew Jackson provided such an opening. In 1816, U.S. troops first crossed into East Florida in pursuit of hostile Seminole Indians. This raid touched off a wider conflict, and after taking command in late 1817, Jackson went beyond his official orders and occupied East Florida in April and May of 1818. This operation became known as the First Seminole War. Except for Adams, all the members of Monroe’s cabinet privately condemned this aggressive action; so did a report of the House of Representatives. But no disciplinary action was taken, mainly because public opinion rallied behind the hero of New Orleans. In November 1818, Secretary Adams informed the Spanish government that the United States had acted in self-defense and that further conflict would be avoided only if East Florida were ceded to the United States. The Madrid government, weakened by Latin American revolutions and the breaking up of its empire, was in no position to resist American bullying. As part of the Adams-Onís Treaty, signed on February 22, 1819, Spain relinquished Florida to the United States. In return, the United States assumed $5 million of the financial claims of American citizens against Spain.

Extending the Boundaries
 Postwar expansionists turned their attention first to Spanish holdings, which included Florida and much of the present-day American West. Their first goal was to obtain Florida from Spain. Between 1810 and 1812, the United States had annexed part of what is now Alabama, claiming that it was part of the Louisiana Purchase. The remainder, known as East Florida, became a prime object of territorial ambition for President James Monroe and his energetic secretary of state, John Quincy Adams. Adams was looking for opportunities to confront Spain for control of the region and put into effect his grand design for continental expansion.

NORTH AMERICA, 1819
Treaties with Britain following the War of 1812 setting the border between the United States and Canada (British North America) made this border the longest unfortified boundary line in the world. 
Greenland


RUSSIAN AMERICA

Danish
 settlements

OREGON COUNTRY
(Joint U.S.–British occupation) 
BRITISH NORTH AMERICA
Con 
 ven

 tion

A
Tre dam
 aty s–O Lin nís e, 1

 of 1



St. Pierre and Miquelon
(Fr.)


UNITED STATES S NEW

PA C I F I C OCEAN

AT L A N T I C OCEAN

N
 PAI

Gulf of
Mexico
Santo
Domingo


Cuba
 BELIZE

Jamaica


Puerto Rico
(Sp.)
Guadeloupe
(Fr.)


Haiti
Indep. 1804


Martinique
(Fr.)


 GUIANA (Br.) United States British possessions Spanish possessions



 Russian possessions





 1000 miles

 1000 kilometers

GRAN COLOMBIA BRAZIL
(Port.) 
Expansion and Migration


 A strong believer that the United States had a continental destiny, Adams also used the confrontation over Florida to make Spain give up its claim to the Pacific coast north of California, thus opening a path for future American expansion. Taking advantage of Spain’s desire to keep its title to Texas—a portion of which the United States had previously claimed as part of the Louisiana Purchase—Adams induced the Spanish minister Luis de Onís to agree to the creation of a new boundary between American and Spanish territory that ran north of Texas but extended all the way to the Pacific. Great Britain and Russia still had competing claims to the Pacific Northwest, but the United States was now in a better position to acquire frontage on a second ocean. Interest in exploitation of the Far West continued to grow during the second and third decades of the nineteenth century. In 1811, a New York merchant, John Jacob Astor, founded the fur-trading post of Astoria at the mouth of the Columbia River in the Oregon Country. Astor’s American Fur Company operated out of St. Louis in the 1820s and 1830s, with fur traders working their way up the Missouri to the northern Rockies and beyond. First they limited themselves to trading for furs with the Indians, but later, businesses such as the Rocky Mountain Fur Company, founded in 1822, relied on trappers or “mountain men” who went after game on their own and sold the furs to agents of the company at an annual meeting or “rendezvous.” These colorful characters, who included such legendary figures as Jedediah Smith, Jim Bridger, Kit Carson, and Jim Beckwourth (one of the many African Americans who contributed to the opening of the West as fur traders, scouts, or settlers), accomplished prodigious feats of survival under harsh natural conditions. Following Indian trails, they explored many parts of the Rockies and the Great Basin. Many of them married Indian women and assimilated much of the culture and technology of the Native Americans. The mountain men were portrayed in American literature and popular mythology as exemplars of a romantic ideal of lonely self-reliance in harmony with unspoiled nature. The Far West, however, remained beyond American dreams of agrarian expansion. The real focus of attention between 1815 and the 1840s was the nearer West, the rich agricultural lands between the Appalachians and the Mississippi that were inhabited by numerous Indian tribes.

Native American Societies
 under Pressure Five Indian nations, with a combined population of nearly sixty thousand, occupied much of what later became Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, and Florida. These nations—the Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek, and Seminole—became known as the “Five Civilized Tribes” because by 1815 they had adopted many of the features of the surrounding white Southern society: an agricultural economy, a republican form of government, and the institution of slavery. Though these southeastern Indians consciously strategized to respond to Jeffersonian exhortations toward “civilization” and the promise of citizenship that came with it, between 1815 and 1833 it became increasingly clear that most white Americans were not interested in incorporating them into U.S. society, whether as nations or as individuals.



 The five nations varied in their responses to white encroachment on their lands. So-called mixed-blood leaders such as John Ross convinced the Cherokee to adopt a strategy of accommodation to increase their chances of survival; the Creek and Seminole, by contrast, took up arms in resistance. The Cherokee were the largest of the five nations. Traditional Cherokee society had combined hunting by men and subsistence farming by women. In the early nineteenth century, the shift to a more agrarian, market-based economy led to an erosion of the traditional matrilineal kinship system, in which a person belonged to his mother’s clan. The new order replaced matrilineal inheritance with the U.S. system of patriarchy in which fathers headed the household and property passed from father to son. An emphasis on the nuclear family with the husband as producer and the wife as domestic caretaker diminished the role of the clan. The shift toward agriculture also helped introduce Americanstyle slavery to Cherokee society. As the Cherokee adopted plantation-style agriculture, they also began to adopt white attitudes toward blacks. By the time of Indian Removal, a few Cherokeeowned plantations with hundreds of slaves, and there were more than fifteen hundred slaves in the Cherokee Nation. Discrimination against Africans in all five nations grew under pressure of contact with whites. Beginning in the 1820s the Cherokee Council adopted rules regulating slaves. Whereas a few Africans in the eighteenth century had been adopted into the tribe and become citizens, under the new laws slaves could not intermarry with Cherokee citizens, engage in trade or barter, or hold property. In an effort to head off encroachments by southern states, the Cherokee attempted to centralize power in a republican government in the 1820s as well. Cherokee historian William McLoughlin has described, “a series of eleven laws passed between 1820 and 1823 . . . constituted a political revolution in the structure of Cherokee government. Under these laws the National Council created a bicameral legislature, a district and superior court system, an elective system of representation by geographical district rather than by town, and a salaried government bureaucracy.” This process culminated in the 1827 adoption of a formal written constitution modeled on the U.S. Constitution. At the same time, a renaissance of Cherokee culture was spurred by Sequoyah’s invention of a written Cherokee language in 1821–1822. While the alphabet was complicated and lacked punctuation, “Sequoyan” provided the Cherokee a new means of selfexpression and a reinvigorated sense of Cherokee identity. The first American Indian newspaper, the Cherokee Phoenix, was published in Sequoyan in 1828. By the time of Indian Removal, Cherokee leaders like John Ross and Elias Boudinot could point with pride to high levels of Cherokee acculturation, education, and economic success at American-style “civilization.” The Seminole Nation, the smallest of the five nations, presents perhaps the starkest cultural contrast to the Cherokee, both because the Seminole reacted to pressure from white settlers with armed resistance rather than accommodation, and because their multicultural history gave them a very different relationship to slavery. The Seminole Nation in Florida formed after the European conquest of America, from the disparate groups of Creek Indians migrating from Georgia and Alabama in the wake of war and disease who mingled with the remnants of native Floridians to form the new



 CHAPTER 9

NATION BUILDING AND NATIONALISM

 tribe. At the same time, Spain had granted asylum to runaway African American slaves from the Carolinas, who created “maroon communities” in Florida, striking up alliances with the Seminole to ward off slave catchers. African Americans and Native Americans intermingled, and by the late eighteenth century, some African Americans were already known as “Seminole Negroes” or “estelusti.” The word “Seminole” itself meant “wild” or “runaway” in the Creek language. Although the Seminoles adopted African slavery at some point in the first decades of the nineteenth century, it was very different from slavery as it existed among whites, or even among the Cherokee and Creek. Seminole “slaves” lived in separate towns, planted and cultivated fields in common, owned large herds of livestock, and paid their “owners” only an annual tribute, similar to that paid by Seminole towns to the micco or chief. During the 1820s and 1830s, the estelusti and the Seminoles were allies in a series of wars against the Americans; however, their alliance came under increasing strain. In 1823, six Seminole leaders, including one of some African ancestry known as “Mulatto King,” signed the Treaty of Moultrie Creek, removing the tribe from their fertile lands in northern Florida to swampland south of Tampa. The signers took bribes and believed unfulfilled promises that they would be allowed to stay on their lands. Another provision of the treaty required the Seminoles to return runaway slaves and turn away any future runaways. During the 1830s, Black Seminoles were some of the staunchest opponents of Indian Removal, and played

Read the Document


