 the grain cradle displaced the scythe for harvesting, and better varieties or strains of crops, grasses, and livestock were introduced. But the availability of good land and the revolution in marketing were the most important spurs to profitable commercial farming. The existence or extension of transportation facilities made distant markets available and plugged farmers into a commercial network that provided credit and relieved them of the need to do their own selling. The emerging exchange network encouraged movement away from diversified farming and toward regional concentration on staple crops. Wheat was the main cash crop of the North, and the center of its cultivation moved westward as soil depletion, pests, and plant diseases lowered yields in older regions. In 1815, the heart of the wheat belt was New York and Pennsylvania. By 1839, Ohio was the leading producer and Indiana and Illinois were beginning to come into their own. On the rocky hillsides of New England, sheep raising was displacing the mixed farming of an earlier era. But the prime examples of successful staple production in this era were in the South. Tobacco continued to be a major cash crop of the upper South (despite declining fertility and a shift to wheat in some areas), rice was important in coastal South Carolina, and sugar was a staple of southern Louisiana. Cotton, however, was the “king” crop in the lower South as a whole. In the course of becoming the nation’s principal export commodity, it brought wealth and prosperity to a belt of states running from South Carolina to Louisiana. (For more on the rise of “King Cotton,” see Chapter 11, pp. 262–264.)

Commerce and Banking
 As regions specialized in growing commercial crops, a new system of marketing emerged. During the early stages in many areas, farmers did their marketing personally, even when it required long journeys overland or by flatboat. With the growth of country towns, local merchants took charge of the crops near their sources, bartering clothing and other manufactured goods for produce. These intermediaries shipped the farmers’ crops to larger local markets such as Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, and St. Louis. From there the commodities could be sent on to Philadelphia, New York, or New Orleans. Cotton growers in the South were more likely to deal directly with factors or agents in the port cities from which their crop was exported. But even in the South, commission merchants in such inland towns as Macon, Atlanta, Montgomery, Shreveport, and Nashville became increasingly important as intermediaries. Credit was a crucial element in the whole system. Farmers borrowed from local merchants, who received an advance of their own when they consigned crops to a commission house or factor. The commission agents relied on credit from merchants or manufacturers at the ultimate destination, which might be Liverpool or New York City. The intermediaries all charged fees and interest, but the net cost to the farmers was less than when they had handled their own marketing. The need for credit encouraged the growth of money and banking. Before the revolutions in transportation and marketing, small-scale local economies could survive to a considerable extent on barter. Under the Constitution, the U.S. government is the only agency authorized to coin money and regulate its value. But in

Emergence of a Market Economy


Listen to the Audio File




The Erie Canal


 Illustration of a lock on the Erie Canal at Lockport, New York, 1838. The successful canal facilitated trade by linking the Great Lakes regions to the eastern seaports.

 the early to mid-nineteenth century, the government printed no paper money and produced gold and silver coins in such small quantities that it utterly failed to meet the expanding economy’s need for a circulating currency. Private or state banking institutions filled the void by issuing banknotes, promises to redeem their paper in specie—gold or silver—on the bearer’s demand. After Congress failed to recharter the Bank of the United States in 1811, existing state-chartered banks took up the slack. Many of them, however, lacked adequate reserves and were forced to suspend specie payments during the War of 1812. The demand for money and credit during the immediate postwar boom led to a vast increase in the number of state banks—from 88 to 208 within two years. The resulting flood of state banknotes caused this form of currency to depreciate well below its face value and threatened a runaway inflation. In an effort to stabilize the currency, Congress established a second Bank of the United States in 1816. The Bank was expected to serve as a check on the state banks by forcing them to resume specie payments. But it did not perform this task well in its early years. In fact, its own free lending policies contributed to the overextension of

 credit that led to financial panic and depression in 1819. When the economy collapsed, as it would do again in 1837, many Americans questioned whether the new system of banking and credit was as desirable as it had seemed to be in times of prosperity. As a result, hostility to banks became a prominent feature of American politics.

Early Industrialism
 The growth of a market economy also created new opportunities for industrialists. In 1815, most manufacturing in the United States was carried on in households, in the workshops of skilled artisans, or in small mills, which used waterpower to turn wheat into flour or timber into boards. The factory form of production, in which supervised workers tended or operated machines under one roof, was rare. It was found mainly in southern New England, where a number of small spinning mills, relying heavily on the labor of women and children, accomplished one step in the manufacture of cotton textiles. But most spinning of thread, as well as the weaving, cutting, and sewing of cloth, was still done by women working at home.



 CHAPTER 9

NATION BUILDING AND NATIONALISM

 As late as 1820, about two-thirds of the clothing worn by Americans was made entirely in households by female family members—wives and daughters. A growing proportion, however, was produced for market rather than direct home consumption. Under the “putting-out” system of manufacturing, merchant capitalists provided raw material to people in their own homes, picked up finished or semifinished products, paid the workers, and took charge of distribution. Home manufacturing of this type was centered in the Northeast and often involved farm families making profitable use of their slack seasons. The making of articles that required greater skill—such as high-quality shoes and boots, carriages or wagons, mill wheels, and barrels or kegs—was mostly carried on by artisans working in small shops in towns. But in the decades after 1815, shops expanded in size, masters tended to become entrepreneurs rather than working artisans, and journeymen often became wage earners rather than aspiring masters. At the same time, the growing market for low-priced goods led to an emphasis on speed, quantity, and standardization in the methods of production. A fully developed factory system emerged first in textile manufacturing. The establishment of the first cotton mills utilizing the power loom as well as spinning machinery—thus making it possible to turn fiber into cloth in a single factory—resulted from the efforts of a trio of Boston merchants: Francis Cabot Lowell, Nathan Appleton, and Patrick Tracy Jackson. On a visit to England in 1810–1811, Lowell succeeded in memorizing the closely guarded industrial secret of how a power loom was constructed. Returning to Boston, he joined with Appleton and Jackson to acquire a water site at nearby Waltham and to obtain a corporate charter for textile manufacturing on a new and expanded scale. Under the name of the Boston Manufacturing Company, the associates began their Waltham operation in 1813. Its phenomenal success led to the erection of a larger and even more profitable mill at Lowell, Massachusetts, in 1822 and another at Chicopee in 1823. Lowell became the great showplace for early American industrialization. Its large workforce of unmarried young women residing in supervised dormitories, its unprecedented scale of operation, its successful mechanization of almost every stage of the production process—all captured the American middle-class imagination in the 1820s and 1830s. But in the late 1830s and 1840s conditions in the mills changed for the worse as the owners began to require more work for lower pay, and some of the mill girls became militant labor activists. One of these was Sarah Bagley, who helped found the Lowell Female Labor Reform Association in 1844. She subsequently led a series of protests against long hours and changes in the work routine that required more work from each operative. Other mills using similar labor systems sprang up throughout New England, and the region became the first important manufacturing area in the United States. The shift in textile manufacture from domestic to factory production shifted the locus of women’s economic activity. As the New England textile industry grew, the putting-out system rapidly declined. Between 1824 and 1832, household production of textiles dropped from 90 to 50 percent in most parts of New England. The shift to factory production changed the course of capitalist activity in the region. Before the 1820s, New England merchants concentrated mainly on international trade, and Boston mercantile houses

Read the Document


The Harbinger, “Female
Workers at Lowell” (1836)


Read the Document


“A Week in the Mill,” Lowell


Offering, Vol. V (1845)


 Lowell, Massachusetts, became America’s model industrial town in the first half of the nineteenth century. In this painting of the town in 1814 (when it was still called East Chelmsford), a multistory brick mill is prominent on the river. Textile mills sprang up throughout Lowell in the 1820s and 1830s, employing thousands of workers, mostly women. The second photograph from c. 1848 shows a Lowell mill worker operating a loom.

 The Politics of Nation Building after the War of 1812

 made great profits. A major source of capital was the lucrative China trade carried on by fast, well-built New England vessels. When the success of Waltham and Lowell became clear, many merchants shifted their capital away from oceanic trade and into manufacturing. This change had important political consequences, as leading politicians such as Daniel Webster no longer advocated a low tariff that favored importers over exporters. They now became leading proponents of a high duty designed to protect manufacturers from foreign competition. Although most manufacturing was centered in the Northeast, the West also experienced modest industrial progress. Increasing rapidly in number and size were facilities for processing farm products, such as gristmills, slaughterhouses, and tanneries. Distilleries in Kentucky and Ohio began during the 1820s to produce vast quantities of corn whiskey for a seemingly insatiable public. One should not assume, however, that America had already experienced an industrial revolution by 1840. In that year, 63.4 percent of the nation’s labor force was still employed in agriculture. Only 8.8 percent of workers were directly involved in factory production (others were employed in trade, transportation, and the professions). Although this represented a significant shift since 1810, when the figures were 83.7 and 3.2 percent, respectively, the numbers would have to change a good deal more before it could be said that industrialization had really arrived. The revolution that did occur during these years was essentially one of distribution rather than production. The growth of a market economy of national scope—still based mainly on agriculture but involving a rapid flow of capital, commodities, and services from region to region—was the major economic development of this period. And it was one that had vast repercussions for all aspects of American life. For those who benefited from it most directly, the market economy provided firm evidence of progress and improvement. But many of those who suffered from its periodic panics and depressions regretted the loss of the individual independence and security that had existed in a localized economy of small producers. These victims of boom and bust were receptive to politicians and reformers who attacked corporations and “the money power.”

The Growth of Cities
 In 1800, the United States was a rural nation. Only 6 percent of its five million people lived in towns of twenty-five hundred or more, and just two cities (Philadelphia and New York) had populations above fifty thousand. By 1850, one-sixth of the twenty-three million Americans lived in towns of twenty-five hundred or more. This was hardly a complete urbanization of American life, but it did reflect the rise of significant urban centers throughout the Northeast and as far west as Chicago and St. Louis as a result of the transportation revolution and the growing market economy. The expansion of commerce, banking, and industry in the Northeast drew people to towns like Lowell, Massachusetts, and Albany, New York, which grew to more than twenty-five thousand people, and the growing web of canals and railroads made inland cities like Cincinnati, St. Louis, and Chicago viable and thriving. New York City alone had grown to more than half a million people by 1850. These young cities were magnets for new immigrants from Europe.



 Canals and railroads also led to the growth of great cities on the western frontier. From a small town in the 1830s, Chicago grew into the nation’s fourth largest city by 1860. It was the hub of a thriving market economy, funneling grain and other farm products from all over the Northwest to cities and towns in the East.

The Politics of Nation Building
 after the War of 1812 What decisions did the federal government face as the country expanded? Geographic expansion, economic growth, and the changes in American life that accompanied them were bound to generate political controversy. Farmers, merchants, manufacturers, and laborers were affected by the changes in different ways. So were Northerners, Southerners, and Westerners. Federal and state policies that were meant to encourage or control growth and expansion did not benefit all these groups or sections equally, and unavoidable conflicts of interest and ideology occurred. But, for a time, these conflicts were not prominently reflected in the national political arena. During the period following the War of 1812, a single party dominated politics. Without a party system in place, politicians did not have to band together to offer the voters a choice of programs and ideologies. A myth of national harmony prevailed, culminating in the Era of Good Feelings during James Monroe’s two terms as president. Behind this facade, individuals and groups fought for advantage, as always, but without the public accountability and need for broad popular approval that a party system would have required. As a result, popular interest in national politics fell. The absence of party discipline and programs did not completely immobilize the federal government. Congress did manage to legislate on some matters of national concern. Although the president had little control over congressional action, he could still take important initiatives in foreign policy. The third branch of government—the Supreme Court—was in a position to make farreaching decisions affecting the relationship between the federal government and the states. The common theme of the public policies that emerged between the War of 1812 and the age of Andrew Jackson, which began in the late 1820s, was an awakening nationalism—a sense of American pride and purpose that reflected the expansionism and material progress of the period.

The Republicans in Power
By the end of the War of 1812, the Federalist Party was no
 longer capable of winning a national election. The party of Jefferson, now known simply as the Republicans, was so completely dominant that it no longer had to distinguish itself from its opponents. Retreating from their original philosophy of states’ rights and limited government, party leaders now openly embraced some of the programs of their former Federalist rivals— policies that seemed dictated by postwar conditions. In December 1815, President Madison proposed to Congress that it consider such measures as the



 CHAPTER 9

NATION BUILDING AND NATIONALISM

Read the Document


Henry Clay, “Defense of
 the American System” (1832)

 Senator Henry Clay of Kentucky was the leading proponent of the American System, a series of proposals for the federal government to play a more active role in promoting economic development. These proposals included a national bank, federally financed internal improvements such as roads and canals, and a tariff on imported goods to protect emerging U.S. industries.

 reestablishment of a national bank, a mildly protective tariff for industry, and a program of federally financed internal improvements to bind “more closely together the various parts of our extended confederacy.” Thus did Jefferson’s successor endorse parts of a program enunciated by Alexander Hamilton. In Congress, Henry Clay of Kentucky took the lead in advocating that the government take action to promote economic development. The keystone of what Clay called the American System was a high protective tariff to stimulate industrial growth and provide a “home market” for the farmers of the West, making the nation economically self-sufficient and free from a dangerous dependence on Europe. In 1816, Congress took the first step toward establishing a neo-Federalist American System. It enacted a tariff raising import duties an average of 25 percent. The legislation was deemed necessary because a flood of British manufactured goods was beginning to threaten the infant industries that had sprung up during the period

 when imports had been shut off by the embargo and the war. The tariff had substantial support in all parts of the country, both from a large majority of congressmen from New England and the Middle Atlantic states and from a respectable minority of the southern delegation. In 1816, manufacturing was not so much a powerful interest as a patriotic concern. Many Americans believed the preservation of political independence and victory in future wars required industrial independence for the nation. Furthermore, important sectors of the agricultural economy also felt the need of protection—especially hemp growers of Kentucky, sugar planters of Louisiana, and wool producers of New England. Later the same year, Congress voted to establish the Second Bank of the United States. The new national bank had a twenty-year charter, an authorized capital of $35 million, and the right to establish branches throughout the country as needed. Organized much like the First Bank, it was a mixed public-private institution, with the federal government owning one-fifth of its stock and appointing five of its twenty-five directors. The Bank served the government by providing a depository for its funds, an outlet for marketing its securities, and a source of redeemable banknotes that could be used to pay taxes or purchase public lands. Legislation dealing with internal improvements made less headway in Congress because it aroused stronger constitutional objections and invited disagreements among sectional groups over who would benefit from specific projects. Except for the National Road, the federal government undertook no major transportation projects during the Madison and Monroe administrations. Both presidents believed that internal improvements were desirable but that a constitutional amendment was required before federal monies could legally be used for the building of roads and canals within individual states. Consequently, public aid for the building of roads and canals continued to come mainly from state and local governments.

Monroe as President
 As did Jefferson before him, President Madison chose his own successor in 1816. James Monroe thus became the third successive Virginian to occupy the White House. He served two full terms and was virtually uncontested in his election to each. Monroe was well qualified in terms of experience, having been an officer in the Revolution, governor of Virginia, a special emissary to France, and secretary of state. He was reliable, dignified, and high principled, as well as stolid and unimaginative, lacking the intellectual depth and agility of his predecessors. Nominated, as was the custom of the time, by a caucus of Republicans in the House of Representatives, Monroe faced only nominal Federalist opposition in the general election. Monroe avoided controversy in his effort to maintain the national harmony that was the keynote of his presidency. His first inaugural address expressed the complacency and optimism of the time, and he followed it up with a goodwill tour of the country, the first made by a president since Washington. A principal aim of Monroe’s administrations was to encourage good feelings. He hoped to accommodate or conciliate all the sectional or economic interests of the country and devote his main attention

 The Politics of Nation Building after the War of 1812

 to the task of asserting American power and influence on the world stage. For example, during the Panic of 1819, an economic depression that followed the postwar boom, Congress acted by passing debt relief legislation, but Monroe himself had no program to relieve the economic crisis. He did not feel called on to exert that kind of leadership, and the voters did not seem to have expected it of him. Monroe prized national harmony even more than economic prosperity. But during his first administration, a bitter controversy developed between the North and the South over the admission of Missouri to the Union. Once again Monroe remained above the battle and suffered little damage to his own prestige. It was left entirely to the legislative branch of the government to deal with the nation’s most serious domestic political crisis between the War of 1812 and the late 1840s.

The Missouri Compromise
 In 1817, the Missouri territorial assembly applied for statehood. Since there were two to three thousand slaves already in the territory and the petition made no provision for their emancipation or for curbing further introduction of slaves, it was clear that Missouri would enter the Union as a slave state unless Congress took special action. Missouri was slated to be the first state, other than Louisiana, to be carved out of the Louisiana Purchase, and resolution of the status of slavery there would have implications for the rest of the trans-Mississippi West.

THE ELECTION OF 1816
Candidate Monroe King 
Party
Republican
Federalist


Electoral Vote


 When the question came before Congress in early 1819, sectional fears and anxieties bubbled to the surface. Many Northerners resented southern control of the presidency and the fact that the three-fifths clause of the Constitution, by which every five slaves were counted as three persons in figuring the state’s population, gave the South’s free population added weight in the House of Representatives and the Electoral College. The South, on the other hand, feared for the future of what it regarded as a necessary balance of power between the sections. Up until 1819, a strict equality had been maintained by alternately admitting slave and free states; in that year, there were eleven of each. But northern population was growing more rapidly than southern, and the North had built up a decisive majority in the House of Representatives. Hence the South saw its equal vote in the Senate as essential for preservation of the balance. In February 1819, Congressman James Tallmadge of New York introduced an amendment to the statehood bill, banning further introduction of slaves into Missouri and requiring steps toward the gradual elimination of slavery within the state. After a heated debate, the House approved the Tallmadge amendment by a narrow margin. The Senate, however, voted it down. The issue remained unresolved until a new Congress convened in December 1819.



 In the great debate that ensued in the Senate, Federalist leader Rufus King of New York argued that Congress was within its rights to require restriction of slavery before Missouri could become a state. Southern senators protested that denying Missouri’s freedom in this matter was an attack on the principle of equality among the states and showed that Northerners were conspiring to upset the balance of power between the sections. They were also concerned about the future of African American slavery and the white racial privilege that went with it. A statehood petition from the people of Maine, who were seeking to be separated from Massachusetts, suggested a way out of the impasse. In February 1820, the Senate passed the Missouri Compromise, voting to couple the admission of Missouri as a slave state with the admission of Maine as a free state. A further amendment was also passed prohibiting slavery in the rest of the Louisiana Purchase north of the southern border of Missouri, or above the latitude of 36°30', and allowing it below that line. The Senate’s compromise then went to the House, where it was initially rejected. Through the adroit maneuvering of Henry Clay— who broke the proposal into three separate bills—it eventually won House approval. The measure authorizing Missouri to frame a constitution and apply for admission as a slave state passed by a razor-thin margin of 90 to 87, with most northern representatives remaining opposed.

THE ELECTION OF 1820
Candidate Monroe J. Q. Adams 
Party
Electoral Vote
Republican
 No party designation

 A major sectional crisis had been resolved. But the Missouri affair had ominous overtones for the future of North–South relations. Thomas Jefferson described the controversy as “a fire bell in the night,” threatening the peace of the Union. In 1821, he wrote prophetically of future dangers: “All, I fear, do not see the speck on our horizon which is to burst on us as a tornado, sooner or later. The line of division lately marked out between the different portions of our confederacy is such as will never, I fear, be obliterated.” The congressional furor had shown that when the issue of slavery or its extension came directly before the people’s representatives, regional loyalties took precedence over party or other considerations. An emotional rhetoric of morality and fundamental rights issued from both sides, and votes followed sectional lines much more closely than on any other issue. If the United States were to acquire any new territories in which the status of slavery had to be determined by Congress, renewed sectional strife would be unavoidable.

Postwar Nationalism and
 the Supreme Court While the Monroe administration was proclaiming national harmony and congressional leaders were struggling to reconcile sectional differences, the third branch of government—the Supreme Court—was making a more substantial and enduring



 CHAPTER 9

NATION BUILDING AND NATIONALISM

View the Map The Missouri Compromise


MAINE
Admitted as free state 
BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)

Gre
 at OREGON COUNTRY Joint U.S.-British occupation of disputed territory

La
 ke s

VT. N.H.

 MASS.

N.Y.


MICHIGAN TERRITORY

R.I.


UNORGANIZED TERRITORY

 CONN.

PA. N.J. OHIO IND.

 ILL.

PA C I F I C OCEAN

NEW SPAIN
(independent Mexico, 1821) 
 DEL.

D.C.
 VA.

MISSOURI
Admitted as slave state 36°30' Missouri Compromise line 
 MD.

KY. N.C. TENN.

ARKANSAS TERRITORY

S.C.


 MISS.

AT L A N T I C OCEAN

 GA.

 ALA.

LA. FLORIDA TERR.

 Closed to slavery by Missouri Compromise

 Free states and territories

 Open to slavery by Missouri Compromise

 Slave states





 500 miles 500 kilometers

THE MISSOURI COMPROMISE, 1820–1821

 The Missouri Compromise kept the balance of power in the Senate by admitting Missouri as a slave state and Maine as a free state. The agreement temporarily settled the argument over slavery in the territories.

 contribution to the growth of nationalism and a strong federal government. Much of this achievement was due to the firm leadership and fine legal mind of the chief justice of the United States, John Marshall. A Virginian, a Federalist, and the devoted disciple and biographer of George Washington, Marshall served as chief justice from 1801 to 1835, and during that entire period he dominated the Court as no other chief justice has ever done. He discouraged dissent and sought to hammer out a single opinion on almost every case that came before the Court. As the author of most of the major opinions issued by the Supreme Court during its formative period, Marshall gave shape to the Constitution and clarified the crucial role of the Court in the American system of government. He placed the protection of individual liberty, especially the right to acquire property, above the attainment of political, social, or economic equality. Ultimately he was a nationalist, believing that the strength, security, and happiness of the American people depended mainly on economic growth and the creation of new wealth. The role of the Supreme Court, in Marshall’s view, was to interpret and enforce the Constitution in a way that encouraged

 economic development, especially against efforts of state legislatures to interfere with the constitutionally protected rights of individuals or combinations of individuals to acquire property through productive activity. To limit state action, he cited the contract clause of the Constitution that prohibited a state from passing a law “impairing the obligation of contracts.” As the legal watchdog of an enterprising, capitalist society, the Court could also approve a liberal grant of power for the federal government so that the latter could fulfill its constitutional responsibility to promote the general welfare by encouraging economic growth and prosperity. In a series of major decisions between 1819 and 1824, the Marshall Court enhanced judicial power and used the contract clause of the Constitution to limit the power of state legislatures. It also strengthened the federal government by sanctioning a broad or loose construction of its constitutional powers and by clearly affirming its supremacy over the states. In Dartmouth College v. Woodward (1819), the Court was asked to rule whether the legislature of New Hampshire had the right to convert Dartmouth from a private college into a state university. Daniel Webster, arguing for the college and against the

 The Politics of Nation Building after the War of 1812

 state, contended that Dartmouth’s original charter of 1769 was a valid and irrevocable contract. The Court accepted his argument. Speaking for all the justices, Marshall made the far-reaching determination that any charter granted by a state to a private corporation was fully protected by the contract clause. In practical terms, the Court’s ruling in the Dartmouth case meant that the kinds of business enterprises then being incorporated by state governments—such as turnpike or canal companies and textile manufacturing firms—could hold on indefinitely to any privileges or favors that had been granted in their original charters. The decision therefore increased the power and independence of business corporations by weakening the ability of the states to regulate them or withdraw their privileges. The ruling helped foster the growth of the modern corporation as a profit-making enterprise with only limited public responsibilities. About a month after the Dartmouth ruling, in March 1819, the Marshall Court handed down its most important decision. The case of McCulloch v. Maryland arose because the state of Maryland had levied a tax on the Baltimore branch of the Bank of the United States. The unanimous opinion of the Court, delivered by Marshall, was that the Maryland tax was unconstitutional. The two main issues were whether Congress had the right to establish a national bank and whether a state had the power to tax or regulate an agency or institution created by Congress. In response to the first question, Marshall set forth his doctrine of “implied powers.” Conceding that no specific authorization to charter a bank could be found in the Constitution, the chief justice argued that such a right could be deduced from more general powers and from an understanding of the “great objects” for which the federal government had been founded. Marshall thus struck a blow for loose construction of the Constitution and a broad grant of power to the federal government to encourage economic growth and stability. In answer to the second question—the right of a state to tax or regulate a federal agency—Marshall held that the Bank was indeed such an agency and that giving a state the power to tax it would also give the state the power to destroy it. In an important assertion of the supremacy of the national government, Marshall argued that the American people “did not design to make their government dependent on the states.” This opinion ran counter to the view of many Americans, particularly in the South, that the Constitution did not take away sovereignty from the states. The debate over federal–state relations was not resolved until the northern victory in the Civil War decisively affirmed the dominance of federal authority. But Marshall’s decision gave great new weight to a nationalist constitutional philosophy. The Gibbons v. Ogden decision of 1824 bolstered the power of Congress to regulate interstate commerce. A steamboat monopoly granted by the state of New York was challenged by a competing ferry service operating between New York and New Jersey. The Court declared the New York grant unconstitutional because it amounted to state interference with Congress’s exclusive right to regulate interstate commerce. The Court’s ruling went a long way toward freeing private interests engaged in furthering the transportation revolution from state interference.



Read the Document


The Opinion of the Supreme
 Court for McCulloch v. Maryland (1819)

 Chief Justice John Marshall affirmed the Supreme Court’s authority to overrule state laws and overrule congressional legislation that it held to be in conflict with the Constitution. The portrait is by Chester Harding, ca. 1829.

 This case clearly showed the dual effect of Marshall’s decision making. It broadened the power of the federal government at the expense of the states while at the same time encouraging the growth of a national market economy. The actions of the Supreme Court provide the clearest and most consistent example of the main nationalistic trends of the postwar period— the acknowledgment of the federal government’s major role in promoting the growth of a powerful and prosperous America and the rise of a nationwide capitalist economy.

Nationalism in Foreign Policy:
The Monroe Doctrine
 The new spirit of nationalism was also reflected in foreign affairs. The main diplomatic challenge facing Monroe after his reelection in 1820 was how to respond to the successful revolt of most of Spain’s Latin American colonies after the Napoleonic wars. In Congress, Henry Clay called for immediate recognition of the new republics. In doing so, he expressed the belief of many Americans that their neighbors to the south were simply following the example of the United States in its own struggle for independence. Before 1822, the administration stuck to a policy of neutrality. Monroe and Secretary of State Adams feared that recognizing the revolutionary governments would antagonize Spain and impede negotiations to acquire Florida. But pressure for recognition grew in Congress, and in 1821, Monroe agreed



 CHAPTER 9

NATION BUILDING AND NATIONALISM

Read the Document


The Monroe Doctrine (1823)


 President James Monroe presented this doctrine as part of his annual message to Congress in December 1823. He proposed it at a time when the Old World powers were losing their colonial interests in the New World. The United States had recognized the former colonies of Argentina, Chile, Peru, Mexico, and Colombia as independent nations in 1822. Monroe was in the unenviable position of trying to maintain a strong stance with the European powers, who were struggling over a balance of world power.

 to recognize and establish diplomatic ties with the Latin American republics. This action put the United States on a possible collision course with the major European powers. Austria, Russia, and Prussia were committed to rolling back the tides of liberalism, self-government, and national selfdetermination that had arisen during the French Revolution and its Napoleonic aftermath. After Napoleon’s first defeat in 1814, the monarchs of Europe had joined in a “Grand Alliance” to protect “legitimate” authoritarian governments from democratic challenges. Great Britain was originally a member of this concert of nations but withdrew when it found that its own interests conflicted with those of the other members. In 1822, the remaining alliance members, joined now by the restored French monarchy, gave France the green light to invade Spain and restore a Bourbon regime that might be disposed to reconquer the empire. Both Great Britain and the United States were alarmed by this prospect. The threat from the Grand Alliance pointed to a need for American cooperation with Great Britain, which had its own

 reasons for wanting to prevent a restoration of Spanish or French power in the New World. Independent nations offered better and more open markets for British manufactured goods than the colonies of other nations, and the spokesmen for burgeoning British industrial capitalism anticipated a profitable economic dominance over Latin America. Monroe welcomed British overtures for cooperation against the Grand Alliance because he believed the United States should take an active role in transatlantic affairs by playing one European power against another. When Monroe presented the question to his cabinet, however, he encountered the opposition of Secretary of State Adams, who distrusted the British and favored a more isolationist policy. Political ambition also predisposed Adams against joint action with Great Britain; he hoped to be the next president and did not want to give his rivals the chance to label him as pro-British. He therefore advocated unilateral action by the United States. In the end, Adams managed to swing Monroe and the cabinet around to his viewpoint. In his annual message to Congress on December 2, 1823, Monroe included a far-reaching statement on foreign policy that

Conclusion: The End of the Era of Good Feelings


 was actually written mainly by Adams, who did become president in 1824. What came to be known as the Monroe Doctrine solemnly declared that the United States opposed any further colonization in the Americas or any effort by European nations to extend their political systems outside their own hemisphere. In return, the United States pledged not to involve itself in the internal affairs of Europe or to take part in European wars. The statement envisioned a North and South America composed entirely of independent republics— with the United States preeminent among them. Although the Monroe Doctrine made little impression on the great powers of Europe at the time it was proclaimed, it signified the rise of a new sense of independence and self-confidence in American attitudes toward the Old World. The United States would now go its own way free of involvement in European conflicts and would energetically protect its own sphere of influence from European interference.



Conclusion: The End of the Era
 of Good Feelings The consensus on national goals and leadership that Monroe had represented could not sustain itself. The Era of Good Feelings turned out to be a passing phase and something of an illusion. Although the pursuit of national greatness would continue, there would be sharp divisions over how it should be achieved. A general commitment to settlement of the West and the development of agriculture, commerce, and industry would endure despite serious differences over what role government should play in the process, but the idea that the elite nonpartisan statesmen could define common purposes and harmonize competing elements—the concept of leadership that Monroe and Adams had advanced—would no longer be viable in the more contentious and democratic America of the Jacksonian era.



 CHAPTER 9

CHAPTER REVIEW

Study
 y Resources Take the Study Plan for Chapter 9 Nation Building and Nationalism on MyHistoryLab

TIME LINE 1813
Boston Manufacturing Company founds cotton mill 
 at Waltham, Massachusetts War of 1812 ends James Monroe elected president Andrew Jackson invades Florida Supreme Court hands down far-reaching decision in Dartmouth College case and in McCulloch v. Maryland; Adams-Onís treaty cedes Spanish territory to the United States; Financial panic is followed by a depression lasting until 1823

 1820 Missouri Compromise resolves nation’s first

 sectional crisis; Monroe reelected president almost unanimously Monroe Doctrine proclaimed Lafayette revisits the United States; Supreme Court decides Gibbons v. Ogden; John Quincy Adams elected president Erie Canal completed; canal era begins

CHAPTER REVIEW
Expansion and Migration 
Emergence of a Market Economy


 What key forces drove American expansion westward during this period?

 How did developments in transportation support the growth of agriculture, banking, and industry?

 Westward expansion was fueled by the ambition to expand American territory and to economically exploit and develop the Far West. The First Seminole War gave Monroe and Adams a chance to push Spain from the southeast under the Adams-Onís Treaty, while entrepreneurs established a fur trade in the North and an aggressive “removal” policy forced Indian tribes from the South. (p. 203)

 Transportation improvements expanded access of producers to regional and even national markets. Farmers began to produce staple crops to sell rather than subsistence crops for their own families. Merchants and banks emerged to connect farm output to distant markets. Textile factories developed to turn Southern cotton into clothing. In the North industrialization increased efficiency but required workers to crowd into factories for long hours. (p. 212)

A
Revolution in Transportation  How did transportation networks change and improve after the War of 1812? New and improved roads were developed, such as the National Road between Cumberland, Maryland and Wheeling, Virginia. Steam power transformed travel along natural rivers with the advent of the steamboat, lowering costs and decreasing transport times. Man-made canals such as the Erie Canal linked seaboard cities directly with the Great Lakes. (p. 210)

 The Politics of Nation Building after the War of 1812 What decisions did the federal government face as the country expanded? The government decided whether new states would allow slavery, how the Supreme Court would function, and how the United States would deal with the European powers. The Missouri Compromise established the 36°30' line dividing slave from free states, while the Court became the supreme constitutional interpreter. The Monroe Doctrine held that the United States and European powers should each control their respective hemispheres. (p. 215)

KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Adams-Onís Treaty Signed by Secretary of State John Quincy Adams and Spanish minister Luis de Onís in 1819, this treaty allowed for U.S. annexation of Florida. p. 204 
 Era of Good Feelings A description of the two terms of President James Monroe (1817–1823) during which partisan conflict abated and federal initiatives suggested increased nationalism. p. 221

 Preemption The right of first purchase of public land. Settlers enjoyed this right even if they squatted on the land in advance of government surveyors. p. 207

 Missouri Compromise A sectional compromise in 1820 that admitted Missouri to the Union as a slave state and Maine as a free state. It also banned slavery in the remainder of the Louisiana Purchase territory above the latitude of 36°30'. p. 217

STUDY RESOURCES

 Dartmouth College v. Woodward In this 1819 case, the Supreme Court ruled that the Constitution protected charters given to corporations by states. p. 218 McCulloch v. Maryland This 1819 ruling asserted the supremacy of federal power over state power and the legal doctrine that the Constitution could be broadly interpreted. p. 219



 Gibbons v. Ogden In this 1824 case, the Supreme Court expanded the power of the federal government to regulate interstate commerce. p. 219 Monroe Doctrine A key foreign policy declaration made by President James Monroe in 1823, it declared the Western Hemisphere off limits to new European colonization; in return, the United States promised not to meddle in European affairs. p. 221

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS 1.
How did new developments in transportation influence westward expansion? 
 3. Why do you think some political leaders saw a connection between a growing market economy and a strong national government?

 2. What was the relationship between westward expansion and the institution of slavery?

 MyHistoryLab Media Assignments Find these resources in the Media Assignments folder for Chapter 9 on MyHistoryLab The Politics of Nation Building after the War of 1812

Expansion and Migration
Read the Document


The Cherokee Treaty


 of 1817 p. 206

◾


Read the Document


Complete the Assignment


Henry Clay, “Defense of the
American System” (1832) p. 216


Confronting a New


Environment p. 208


◾


View the Map


The Missouri Compromise p. 218


A
Revolution in Transportation ◾


The Opinion of the Supreme
 Court for McCulloch v. Maryland (1819) p. 219

Expanding America
 and Internal Improvements p. 211

Emergence of a Market Economy
Listen to the Audio File


◾


Read the Document


View the Map


The Erie Canal p. 213


Read the Document


The Harbinger, Female Workers
 at Lowell (1836) p. 214

Read the Document


Vol. V (1845) p. 214


“A Week in the Mill,” Lowell Offering,


◾


Read the Document


The Monroe Doctrine


(1823) p. 220


◾ Indicates Study Plan Media Assignment




The Triumph of White
 Men’s Democracy

Contents and Learning Objectives
DEMOCRACY IN THEORY AND PRACTICE PG. 226

HEYDAY OF THE SECOND PARTY SYSTEM PG. 242

 How did the relationship between the government and the people change during this time?

 What was the two-party system, and how were the parties different?

JACKSON AND THE POLITICS OF DEMOCRACY PG. 229

FEATURE ESSAY
Racial Identity in a White Man’s Democracy 
 What political conflicts did President Andrew Jackson face and how did he resolve them?

THE BANK WAR AND THE SECOND PARTY SYSTEM PG. 237
What were the arguments for and against the Bank of the United States? 
 Listen to the Audio File on myhistorylab

 Chapter 10 The Triumph of White Men’s Democracy

Democratic Space:
The New Hotels
 During the 1820s and 1830s the United States became a more democratic country for at least some of its population. The emerging spirit of popular democracy found expression in a new institution—the large hotel with several stories and hundreds of rooms. Presidentelect Andrew Jackson, the political figure who embodied the spirit of the age, stayed in the recently opened National Hotel when he arrived in Washington in 1829 to prepare for his administration. After a horde of well-wishers made a shambles of the White House during his inaugural reception, Jackson retreated to the hotel for a little peace and a chance to consult with his advisers. The National was only one of several large “first-class” hotels that opened immediately before or during Jackson’s presidency. Among the others were the Tremont House in Boston, the Baltimore City Hotel, and New York’s Astor House. The hotel boom responded to the increasing tendency of Americans in the 1820s and 1830s to move about the country. It was to service the rising tides of travelers, transients, and new arrivals that entrepreneurs erected these large places of accommodation. There they provided lodging, food, and drink on an

 unprecedented scale. These establishments were as different from the inns of the eighteenth century as the steamboat was from the flatboat. According to historian Doris Elizabeth King, “the new hotels were so obviously ‘public’ and ‘democratic’ in their character that foreigners were often to describe them as a true reflection of American society.” Their very existence showed that many people, white males in particular, were on the move geographically and socially. Among the hotels’ patrons were traveling salesmen, ambitious young men seeking to establish themselves in a new city, and restless pursuers of “the main chance” (unexpected economic opportunities) who were not yet ready to put down roots. Hotel managers shocked European visitors by failing to enforce traditional social distinctions among their clientele. Under the “American plan,” guests were required to pay for their meals and to eat at a common “table d’hôte” with anyone who happened to be there, including servants traveling with their employers. Ability to pay was the only requirement for admission (unless one happened to be an unes-corted woman or dark-skinned), and every white male patron, regardless

 New York’s Astor House, completed in 1836, was one of the grandest of the new American hotels, offering fine accommodations to travelers who could afford to pay for them.

 of social background and occupation, enjoyed the kind of personal service previously available only to a privileged class. Many patrons experienced such amenities as gaslight, indoor plumbing, and steam heat for the first time in their lives. Because a large proportion of the American population stayed in hotels at one time or another—a privilege that was, in Europe, reserved for the elite—foreigners inferred that there was widespread prosperity and a much greater “equality of condition” than existed in Europe. he hotel culture revealed some of the limitations of the new era of democratic ideals and aspirations. African Americans, Native Americans, and women were excluded or discriminated against, just as they were denied suffrage at a time when it was being extended to all white males. The genuinely poor simply could not afford to patronize the hotels and were consigned to squalid rooming houses. If the social equality within the hotel reflected a decline in traditional status distinctions, the broad gulf between

T


 potential patrons and those who could not pay the rates signaled the growth of inequality based on wealth. Hotel life also reflected the emergence of democratic politics. Professional politicians of a new breed, pursuing the votes of a mass electorate, spent much of their time in hotels as they traveled about. Those elected to Congress or a state legislature often stayed in hotels during the session, and the political deals and bargains required for effective party organization or legislative success were sometimes concluded in these establishments. The hotel can thus be seen as a fitting symbol for the democratic spirit of the age, one that shows its shortcomings as well as its strengths. The new democracy was first of all political, involving the extension of suffrage to virtually all white males and the rise of modern political parties appealing to a mass electorate. It was also social in that it undermined the habit of deferring to people because of their birth or ancestry and offered a greater expectation that individuals born in relatively humble circumstances could climb the ladder of success. But the ideals of equal citizenship and opportunity did not extend across the lines of race and gender, which actually hardened to some degree during this period.



 CHAPTER 10

THE TRIUMPH OF WHITE MEN’S DEMOCRACY

Democracy in Theory and Practice
 How did the relationship between the government and the people change during this time? During the 1820s and 1830s, the term democracy first became a generally accepted term to describe how American institutions were supposed to work. The Founders had defined democracy as direct rule by the people; most of them rejected this concept of a democratic approach to government because it was at odds with their conception of a well-balanced republic led by a “natural aristocracy.” For champions of popular government in the Jacksonian period, however, the people were truly sovereign and could do no wrong. “The voice of the people is the voice of God” was their clearest expression of this principle. Conservatives were less certain of the wisdom of the common folk. But even they were coming to recognize that public opinion had to be won over before major policy decisions could be made. Besides evoking a heightened sense of “popular sovereignty,” the democratic impulse seemed to stimulate a process of social leveling. Earlier Americans had usually assumed that the rich and wellborn should be treated with special respect and recognized as natural leaders of the community and guardians of its culture and values. By the 1830s, as the hotel culture revealed, such habits of deference were in decline. The decline of deference meant that “self-made men” of lowly origins could now rise more readily to positions of power and influence. But economic equality, the equitable sharing of wealth, was not part of the mainstream agenda. This was, after all, a competitive capitalist society. The watchword was equality of opportunity, not equality of reward. Life was a race, and so long as white males appeared to have an equal start, there could be no reason for complaint if some were winners and some were losers. Historians now generally agree that economic inequality—the gap between rich and poor Americans— was actually increasing during this period of political and social democratization.

Democracy and Society
 Although some types of inequality persisted or even grew during the age of democracy, they did so in the face of a growing belief that equality was the governing principle of American society. The plain folk were now likely to greet claims for special treatment with indifference or scorn, and to demand equal treatment whatever their place in society. White domestic workers refused to be called “servants” and instead called themselves “hired help.” Household workers often refused to wear livery, agreed to work for only short periods of time, and sometimes insisted on eating at the same table as their employers. As noted in the maid’s comments quoted at the beginning of Chapter 8, no true American was willing to be considered a member of a servant class, and those who engaged in domestic work regarded it as a temporary stopgap. Except as a euphemistic substitute for the word slave, the term servant virtually disappeared from the American vocabulary. The decline of distinctive modes of dress for upper and lower classes conveyed the principle of equality in yet another way. The

 elaborate periwigs and knee breeches worn by eighteenth-century gentlemen gave way to short hair and pantaloons, a style that was adopted by men of all social classes. Fashionable dress among women also ceased to be a sure index of gentility; serving girls on their day off wore the same kind of finery as the wives and daughters of the wealthy. Those with a good eye for detail might detect subtle differences, but the casual observer of crowds in a large city could easily conclude that all Americans belonged to a single social class. In reality, though, inequality based on control of productive resources was increasing during the Jacksonian period. A growing percentage of the population, especially in urban areas, possessed no real estate and little other property. The rise of industrialization was creating a permanent class of low-paid, unorganized wage earners. In rural areas, there was a significant division between successful commercial farmers and small holders, or tenants who subsisted on marginal land, as well as enormous inequality of status between southern planters and their black slaves. But most foreign observers overlooked the widening gap between the propertied middle class and the laboring population; their attention was riveted on the fact that all white males were equal before the law and at the polls, a situation that was genuinely radical by European standards. Traditional forms of privilege and elitism were also under strong attack, as evidenced by changes in the organization and status of the learned professions. Under Jacksonian pressure, state legislatures abolished the licensing requirements for physicians, previously administered by local medical societies. As a result, practitioners of unorthodox modes of healing were permitted to compete freely with established medical doctors. One popular therapy was Thomsonianism, a form of treatment based entirely on the use of common herbs and roots. Thomsonians argued that their own form of medicine would “make every man his own physician.” The democratic tide also struck the legal profession. Local bar associations continued to set the qualifications for practicing attorneys, but in many places they lowered standards and admitted persons with little or no formal training and only the most rudimentary knowledge of the law. For the clergy, “popular sovereignty” meant being increasingly under the thumb of the laity. The growing dependence of ministers on their congregations forced them to develop a more popular and emotional style of preaching. Ministers had ceased to command respect merely because of their office. They had to please their public, in much the same way as a politician had to satisfy the electorate. In this atmosphere of democratic leveling, the popular press came to play an increasingly important role as a source of information and opinion. Written and read by common folk, hundreds of newspapers and magazines ushered the mass of white Americans into the political arena. New political views—which in a previous generation might have been silenced by those in power—could now find an audience. Reformers of all kinds could easily publicize their causes, and the press became the venue for the great national debates on issues such as the government’s role in banking and the status of slavery in new states and territories. As a profession, journalism was open to those who were literate and thought they had something to say. The editors of newspapers with a large circulation were the most influential opinion makers of the age.

Democracy in Theory and Practice




Democratic Culture
 The democratic spirit also found expression in the rise of new forms of literature and art directed at a mass audience. The intentions of individual artists and writers varied considerably. Some sought success by pandering to popular taste in defiance of traditional standards of high culture. Others tried to capture the spirit of the age by portraying the everyday life of ordinary Americans rather than the traditional subjects of “aristocratic” art. A notable few hoped to use literature and art as a way of improving popular taste and instilling deeper moral and spiritual values. But all of them were aware that their audience was the broad citizenry of a democratic nation rather than a refined elite. The romantic movement in literature, which came to the fore in the early nineteenth century in both Europe and America, valued strong feeling and mystical intuition over the calm rationality and appeal to common experience that had prevailed in the writing of the eighteenth century. Romanticism was not necessarily connected with democracy; in Europe, it sometimes went along with a reaffirmation of feudalism and the right of a superior few to rule over the masses. In the American setting, however, romanticism often appealed to the feelings and intuitions of ordinary people: the innate love of goodness, truth, and beauty that all people were thought to possess. Writers in search of popularity and economic success, however, often deserted the high plane of romantic art for crass sentimentalism—a willingness to pull out all emotional stops to thrill readers or bring tears to their eyes. Literacy and a revolution in the technology of printing enabled a mass market for popular literature. An increase in the number of potential readers and a decrease in publishing costs led to a flood of lurid and sentimental novels, some of which became the first American best sellers. Gothic horror and the perils of virtuous heroines threatened by dastardly villains were among the ingredients that readers came to expect from popular fiction. Many of the new sentimental novels were written by and for women. Some women writers implicitly protested against their situation by portraying men in general as tyrannical, unreliable, or vicious and the women they abandoned or failed to support as resourceful individualists capable of making their own way in a man’s world. But the standard happy endings sustained the convention that a woman’s place was in the home, for a virtuous and protective man usually turned up and saved the heroine from independence. In the theater, melodrama became the dominant genre. Despite religious objections, theater-going was a popular recreation in the cities during the Jacksonian era. The standard fare involved the inevitable trio of beleaguered heroine, mustachioed villain, and a hero who asserted himself in the nick of time. Patriotic comedies extolling the common sense of the rustic Yankee who foiled the foppish European aristocrat were also popular and aroused the democratic sympathies of the audience. Men and women of all classes went to the theater, and those in the cheap seats often behaved raucously and even violently when they did not like what they saw. Unpopular actors or plays could even provoke serious riots. In an 1849 incident in New York, twenty-three people were killed in disorders stemming from hostility toward an English actor who was the rival of Edwin Forrest, the most popular American thespian of the time.

Read the Document


Herman Melville, Excerpt


 from Moby-Dick

 In Moby-Dick, Herman Melville produced a novel sufficiently original in form and conception to more than fulfill the demand of Young Americans for “a New Literature to fit the New Man in the New Age.” But Melville was too deep a thinker not to see the perils that underlay the soaring ambition and aggressiveness of the new age.

 The spirit of “popular sovereignty” expressed itself less dramatically in the visual arts, but its influence was still felt. Beginning in the 1830s, painters turned from portraying great events and famous people to depicting everyday life. William Sidney Mount, who painted lively rural scenes, expressed the credo of the democratic artist: “Paint pictures that will take with the public—never paint for the few but the many.” Architecture and sculpture reflected the democratic spirit in a different way; they were viewed as civic art forms meant to glorify the achievements of the republic. In the 1820s and 1830s, the Greek style with its columned facades not only predominated in the architecture of public buildings but was also favored for banks, hotels, and private dwellings. Besides symbolizing an identification of the United States with the democracy of ancient Greece, it achieved monumental impressiveness at a fairly low cost. Even in newly settled frontier communities, it was relatively easy and inexpensive to



 CHAPTER 10

THE TRIUMPH OF WHITE MEN’S DEMOCRACY

 put up a functional square building and then add a classical facade. Not everyone could live in structures that looked like Greek temples, but almost everyone could admire them from the outside or conduct business within their walls. Serious exponents of a higher culture and a more refined sensibility sought to reach the new public in the hope of enlightening or uplifting it. The “Brahmin poets” of New England—Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, James Russell Lowell, and Oliver Wendell Holmes—offered lofty sentiments and moral messages to a receptive middle class; Ralph Waldo Emerson carried his philosophy of spiritual self-reliance to lyceums and lecture halls across the country; and great novelists such as Nathaniel Hawthorne and Herman Melville experimented with the popular romantic genres. But Hawthorne and Melville failed to gain a large readership. The ironic and pessimistic view of life that pervaded their work clashed with the optimism of the age. For later generations of American critics, however, the works of Melville and Hawthorne became centerpieces of the American literary “renaissance” of the mid-nineteenth century. Hawthorne’s The Scarlet Letter (1850) and Melville’s MobyDick (1851) are now regarded as masterworks of American fiction. The modern ideal of art for art’s sake was alien to the instructional spirit of mid-nineteenth-century American culture. The responsibility of the artist in a democratic society, it was assumed, was to contribute to the general welfare by encouraging virtue and proper sentiments. Only Edgar Allan Poe seemed to fit the European image of romantic genius, rebelling against middle-class pieties. But in his own way, Poe exploited the popular fascination with death in his verse and used the conventions of Gothic horror in his tales. The most original of the antebellum poets, Walt Whitman, sought to articulate the rising democratic spirit, but his abandonment of traditional verse forms and his freedom in dealing with the sexual side of human nature left him relatively isolated and unappreciated during his most creative years.

Democratic Political Institutions
 The supremacy of democracy was most obvious in the new politics of universal white manhood suffrage and mass political parties. By the 1820s, most states had removed the last remaining barriers to voting participation by all white males. This change was not as radical or controversial as it would be later in nineteenth-century Europe; ownership of land was so common in the United States that a general suff rage did not mean men without property became a voting majority. Accompanying this broadening of the electorate was a rise in the proportion of public officials who were elected rather than appointed. Increasingly, “the people” chose judges, as well as legislative and executive office holders. A new style of politicking developed. Politicians had to campaign, demonstrating in their speeches on the stump that they could mirror voters’ fears and concerns. Electoral politics became more festive and dramatic. Skillful and farsighted politicians—such as Martin Van Buren in New York—began in the 1820s to build stable statewide political organizations out of what had been loosely organized factions. Before the rise of effective national parties, politicians created true party organizations on the state level by dispensing government jobs to friends and supporters, and by attacking rivals as enemies of popular aspirations. Earlier politicians had regarded parties as a threat to republican virtue

 and had embraced them only as a temporary expedient, but Van Buren regarded a permanent two-party system as essential to democratic government. In his opinion, parties were an effective check on the temptation to abuse power. The major breakthrough in American political thought during the 1820s and 1830s was the idea of a “loyal opposition,” ready to capitalize politically on the mistakes or excesses of the “ins” without denying the right of the “ins” to act the same way when they became the “outs.” Changes in the method of nominating and electing a president fostered the growth of a two-party system on the national level. By 1828, presidential electors were chosen by popular vote rather than by state legislatures in all but two of the twenty-four states. The new need to mobilize grassroots voters behind particular candidates required national organization. Coalitions of state parties that could agree on a single standard-bearer gradually evolved into the great national parties of the Jacksonian era—the Democrats and the Whigs. When national nominating conventions made their appearance in 1831, candidate selection became a matter to be taken up by representative party assemblies, not congressional caucuses or ad hoc political alliances. New political institutions and practices encouraged a great upsurge of popular interest and participation. In the presidential election of 1824, the proportion of adult white males voting was less than 27 percent. In 1828, it rose sharply to 55 percent; it held at that level for the elections of 1832 and 1836 and then shot up to 78 percent in 1840—the first election in which two fully organized national parties each nominated a single candidate and campaigned for their choices in every state in the Union.

Economic Issues
 Economic questions dominated the political controversies of the 1820s and 1830s. The Panic of 1819 and the subsequent depression heightened popular interest in government economic policy, first on the state and then on the national level. No one really knew how to solve the problems of a market economy that went through cycles of boom and bust, but many people thought they had the answer. Some, especially small farmers, favored a return to a simpler and more “honest” economy without banks, paper money, and the easy credit that encouraged speculation. Others, particularly emerging entrepreneurs, saw salvation in government aid and protection for venture capital. Entrepreneurs appealed to state governments for charters that granted special privileges to banks, transportation enterprises, and manufacturing corporations. Politicians attempted to respond to the conflicting views about the best way to restore and maintain prosperity. Out of the economic distress of the early 1820s came a rapid growth of state-level political activity and organization that foreshadowed the rise of national parties organized around economic programs. The party disputes that arose over corporations, tariffs, banks, and internal improvements involved more than the direct economic concerns of particular interest groups. The republican ideology of the revolutionary period survived through widespread fears of conspiracy against American liberty and equality. Whenever any group appeared to be exerting decisive influence over public policy, people who did not identify with that group’s aspirations were quick to charge its members with corruption and the unscrupulous pursuit of power.

Jackson and the Politics of Democracy


 The notion that the American experiment was a fragile one, constantly threatened by power-hungry conspirators, eventually took two principal forms. Jacksonians believed that “the money power” endangered the survival of republicanism; their opponents feared that populist politicians like Jackson himself—alleged “rabble-rousers”—would gull the electorate into ratifying high-handed and tyrannical actions contrary to the true interests of the nation. An object of increasing concern for both sides was the role of the federal government. Should it take positive steps to foster economic growth, as the National Republicans and later the Whigs contended, or should it simply attempt to destroy what Jacksonians decried as “special privilege” or “corporate monopoly”? Almost everyone favored equality of opportunity, but there was serious disagreement over whether this goal could best be achieved by active government support of commerce and industry or by divorcing the government from the economy in the name of laissez-faire and free competition.

Labor Radicalism and Equal Rights
