 a major role in the Second Seminole War, fought in resistance to removal from 1835 to 1842. General Thomas W. Jesup, the leader of the U.S. Army, claimed, “This, you may be assured is a negro and not an Indian war.” Treaties like the one signed at Moultrie Creek in 1823 reduced tribal holdings; the federal government used a combination of deception, bribery, and threats to induce land cessions. State governments also began to act on their own, proclaiming state jurisdiction over lands still allotted by federal treaty to Indians within the state’s borders. The stage was thus set for the forced removal of the Five Civilized Tribes to the trans-Mississippi West during the administration of Andrew Jackson. (See the Feature Essay, “Confronting a New Environment,” pp. 208–209. Jackson’s Indian Removal policy is discussed in further detail in Chapter 10.) Farther north, in the Ohio Valley and the Northwest Territory, Native Americans had already suffered military defeat in the conflict between Britain and the United States, leaving them only a minor obstacle to the ambitions of white settlers and land speculators. When the British withdrew from the Old Northwest in 1815, they left their former Indian allies virtually defenseless before the tide of whites who rushed into the region. Consigned by treaty to reservations outside the main lines of white advance, most of the tribes were eventually forced west of the Mississippi. The last stand of the Indians in this region occurred in 1831–1832, when a faction of the confederated Sac and Fox Indians under Chief

The Cherokee Treaty of 1817


 Mountain men and Native Americans met at a rendezvous to trade their furs to company agents in exchange for food, ammunition, and other goods. Feasting, drinking, gambling, and sharing exploits were also part of the annual event. The painting Rendezvous (ca. 1837) by Alfred Jacob Miller.

Expansion and Migration


 Black Hawk refused to abandon their lands east of the Mississippi. Federal troops and Illinois state militia pursued Black Hawk’s band and drove the Indians back to the river, where they were almost exterminated while attempting to cross to the western bank. Uprooting once populous Indian communities of the Old Northwest was part of a national program for removing Indians of the eastern part of the country to an area beyond the Mississippi. As originally conceived by Thomas Jefferson, removal would have allowed those Indians who became “civilized” to remain behind on individually owned farms and qualify for American citizenship. This policy would reduce Indian holdings without appearing to violate American standards of justice. Not everyone agreed with Jefferson’s belief that Indians, unlike blacks, had the natural ability to adopt white ways and become useful citizens of the republic. During the Monroe era, it became clear that white settlers, many of whom saw Native Americans as irredeemable savages, wanted nothing less than the removal of all Indians, “civilized” or not. Andrew Jackson, who made his name as an Indian fighter in the 1810s, presided over a shift to a far more aggressive Indian removal policy.

Settlement to the Mississippi
 While Indians were being hustled or driven beyond the Mississippi, white settlers poured across the Appalachians and filled the agricultural heartland of the United States. In 1810, only about one-seventh of the American population lived beyond the Appalachians; by 1840, more than one-third did. During that period, Illinois grew from a territory with 12,282 inhabitants to a state with 476,183; Mississippi’s population of about 40,000 increased tenfold; and Michigan grew from a remote frontier area with fewer than 5000 people into a state with more than 200,000. Eight new western states were added to the Union during this period. Because of the government’s removal policies, few settlers actually had to fight Indians. But they did have to obtain possession of land and derive a livelihood from it. Much of the vast acreage opened up by the westward movement passed through the hands of land speculators before it reached farmers and planters. In the prosperous period following the War of 1812, and again during the boom of the early to mid-1830s, speculation in public lands proceeded at a massive and feverish rate. After a financial panic in 1819 brought ruin to many who had purchased tracts on credit, the minimum price was lowered from $2.00 to $1.25 an acre, but full payment was required in cash. Since few settlers could afford the necessary outlays, wealthy speculators continued to acquire most good land. Eventually, most of the land did find its way into the hands of actual cultivators. In some areas, squatters arrived before the official survey and formed claims associations that policed land auctions to prevent “outsiders” from bidding up the price and buying their farms out from under them. Squatters also agitated for formal right of first purchase or preemption from the government. Between 1799 and 1830, Congress passed a number of special acts that granted squatters in specific areas the right to purchase at the minimum price the land that they had already improved. In 1841, Congress formally acknowledged the right to farm on public lands with the assurance of a future preemption right.



 Settlers who arrived after speculators had secured title had to deal with land barons. Fortunately for the settlers, most speculators operated on credit and needed a quick return on their investment, selling land at a profit to settlers who had some capital, renting out farms until tenants had earned enough to buy them, or loaning money to squatters who would later pay for the land in installments. As a result, the family farm or owner-operated plantation became the characteristic unit of western agriculture. Farmers had to produce enough food to subsist and to sell at market to pay off their debts. Not surprisingly, most of the earliest settlement was along rivers that provided a natural means of transportation for flatboats loaded with corn, wheat, cotton, or cured meat. From more remote areas, farmers drove livestock over primitive trails and roads to eastern markets. To turn bulky grain, especially corn, into a more easily transportable commodity, farmers in remote regions often distilled grain into whiskey. Local marketing centers quickly sprang up, usually at river junctions. Some of these grew into small cities virtually overnight, greatly accelerating regional development. Most frontier people welcomed the opportunity to sell some of their crops in order to acquire the consumer goods they could not produce for themselves. Women especially benefited from the chance to buy some household necessities that they had previously made at home, such as soap, candles, and some articles of clothing. But many of them also valued self-sufficiency and tried to produce enough of the necessities of life to survive when cash crops failed or prices were low.

The People and Culture of the Frontier
 Most of the settlers who populated the West were farmers from the seaboard states. Rising land prices and declining fertility of the soil in the older regions often motivated their migration. Most moved in family units and tried to recreate their former ways of life as soon as possible. Women were often reluctant to migrate in the first place, and when they arrived in new areas, they strove valiantly to recapture the comfort and stability they had left behind. In general, pioneers sought out the kind of terrain and soil with which they were already familiar. People from eastern uplands favored western hill country. Piedmont and Tidewater farmers or planters usually made for the lower and flatter areas. Early settlers avoided the fertile prairies of the Midwest, preferring instead river bottoms or wooded sections because they were more like home and could be farmed by tried-and-true methods. Rather than being the bold and deliberate innovators pictured in American mythology, typical agricultural pioneers were deeply averse to changing their habits. Yet adjustments were necessary simply to survive under frontier conditions. Initially, at least, isolated homesteads required a high degree of self-sufficiency. Men usually cut down trees, built cabins, broke the soil, and put in crops. Besides cooking, keeping house, and caring for children, women made clothes, manufactured soap and other household necessities, churned butter, preserved food for the winter, and worked in the fields at busy times; at one time or another, women performed virtually all the tasks required by frontier farming. Crops had to be planted, harvested, and readied for home consumption with simple tools brought in wagons from the East—often little more than an axe, a plow, and a spinning wheel.

 Complete the Assignment Confronting a New Environment on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


Confronting a New
Environment


 This 1839 satire on western emigration depicts a battered wagon of half-starved pioneers returning to New England after suffering hardships in Illinois, while an optimistic traveler is on his way there.

T


 he era of Indian Removal in the 1830s, during which tens of thousands of Indians were driven from the Southeast to present-day Kansas and Oklahoma, also saw hundreds of thousands of white farmers move to Illinois and Missouri. Despite obvious differences in their experiences, both groups of migrants had to adapt to the same unfamiliar prairie environment. Seeking to convince Indian tribes to move west and abandon their lands for white settlement, U.S. government officials argued that western lands would afford space and bounty for Indian and European American settlers alike. Indeed, in his address to Congress on December 6, 1830, President Andrew Jackson chided Indians for their resistance to removal: Our [white] children by thousands yearly leave the land of their birth to



 seek new homes in distant regions. Does Humanity weep at these painful separations from every thing, animate and inanimate, with which the young heart has become entwined? Far from it. It is rather a source of joy that our country affords scope where our young population may range unconstrained . . . . Certainly, the new Western environment offered plenty of space. But European Americans and Eastern Indians were woodland people. They lived at the tail end of the “Age of Wood” when forests provided the primary material for building, fencing, and heating, not to mention habitat for game that supplemented their diets. The ideal landscape was a clearing for a farm or small village surrounded by thick forest. In the prairie, emigrants confronted an opposite landscape: huge openings— “barrens”—fringed by trees. “To one unaccustomed to it, there is something inexpressibly lonely

 in the solitude of a prairie,” wrote Washington Irving. “The loneliness of the forest seems nothing to it.” Settlers clustered at the prairie’s edge, and only partly for the timber. The grassland had a reputation for fire, dryness, and infertility. James Madison, writing to Thomas Jefferson, expressed the conviction that Illinois was a “miserably poor” country that would never bear “a single bush.” Unsurprisingly, therefore, most of the early settlers to the prairie states gravitated to the relatively rare hilly and wooded areas that reminded them from where they had come. At the time, most Americans believed that vegetation revealed its soil’s fertility: The bigger the greenery, the richer the earth. Soil that produced no trees seemed mighty poor indeed. People eventually tried farming the prairie, of course, and discovered the truth: The soil was, in fact, so immensely fertile it supported a thick

 shield of tangled roots. “Sod-busting” required oxen, tools, and muscle; before the John Deere iron plow became readily available in the mid-nineteenth century, most early settlers were not up to the difficult task. If Illinois initially seemed barren, the lands of present-day Kansas and Oklahoma seemed positively sterile. In 1820, a government surveyor gave an exaggerated but well-publicized name to this swath of the continent “The Great American Desert.” It was here that a diverse assemblage of Indian refugees tried their best to set up new homes in the removal era. In addition to the well-known Five Civilized Tribes from the South, the newcomers included groups from the Northeast and Old Northwest, including the Chippewa, Kickapoo, Miami, Ottawa, Potawatomi, Sac-Fox, Seneca, and Winnebago Indians, among others. For these woodland peoples, the sea of grass came as a shock. No wonder that many of the relocated Indians complained to the “Great Father”—the federal government. Writing to Indian agent William Clark (of Lewis and Clark fame), Shawnee leaders related that they “traveled three days through prairies and thought we were in the land of the great spirit, for we could see nothing but what was above us and the earth we walked upon.” The Wyandot Nation of Ohio decided to send an “unbiased, unprejudiced” exploring expedition to see their promised land on the Missouri-Kansas border. The report was discouraging: “[T]here is but little timber and what there is, is of a low scrubby, knotty and twisted kind and fit for nothing but firewood . . . . [T]here is not good timber sufficient for the purposes of a people that wish to pursue agriculture.” Although many Indian tribes had extensive experience with various forms of agriculture, old methods could not be easily replicated on the prairie, where the soil was too hard to be easily cultivated, and water was scarce. A few Indian groups, such as the Cherokee, had learned to grow marketable crops in their traditional homelands and continued to do so in the

 new lands after removal. Nonetheless, some Cherokee chose to become seasonal bison hunters on the Southern Plains. Even with changes in their farming and hunting methods, it took decades for the Cherokee to recover from the dispossession of their towns and farms in Georgia. Adaptation was made more difficult by the staggering human losses they suffered on their forced march to the West. The sickness and death on the Cherokee Trail of Tears—about a fourth of the migrants died on the way—was an extreme form of an experience that European American settlers also faced. For whites and natives alike, moving west meant growing ill; the body became unsettled in its new environment. A spokesperson for tribes removed from upstate New York to Kansas called it “a poor barren unhealthy country where many families have lost all their children in a course of a few years.” For both groups, catching the “ague” was an inevitable part of “seasoning” in this new country, which had a reputation for sickliness. Now understood as malaria, the ague commonly presented itself in cycles of shaking. Indeed, the experience was so common that there were essentially two types of settlers: veterans of the “pioneer shakes” and greenhorns. Likewise, it was impossible to completely avoid “the chills” because it could arrive on the very air that permeated wooden cabins. Antebellum settlers attributed many of their maladies to “miasma.” Noah Webster defined it as “infecting substances floating in the air; the effluvia of any putrefying bodies, rising and floating in the atmosphere.” According to popular belief, miasma came from rot in humus-rich forests, fertile bottomlands, and well-watered prairie. When settlers broke the prairie in order to “improve” the land, they released foul airs. People attempted to fight miasma by purging the air with coal smoke or wearing strong-smelling bags of herbs around the neck. But the land got sicker before it got healthier. The irony was not lost on settlers. Timothy Flint, who published an influential western guidebook

 in 1831, wrote that “there appears to be in the great plan of Providence a scale, in which the advantages and disadvantages of human condition are balanced. Where the lands are extremely fertile, it seems to be appended to them, as a drawback to that advantage, that they are generally sickly.” In the antebellum period, many Americans believed that land, like bodies, had intrinsic constitutions or states of health. Ideally, individuals and races could be matched to their “proper” environment (an idea used to defend slavery). Many Northerners and Indians from the North feared for their health when migrating to the hot, humid Mississippi basin. Billy Caldwell, a half-Irish, half-Indian chief from the Great Lakes region, declared that Kansas was “unhealthy for people from a cold climate.” There was always the hope that the new Indian homelands would prove unsuitable to white settlers. In 1836, en route to their new home, the Sac and Fox Indians said with bitter sarcasm that “the south side of the Missouri River is intended by the great spirit for the Red skins and for this reason he made so much prairie, that it would not suit . . . the white man, and if this had not been the case the red man would in short time have been without a home.” In a matter of time, though, the “white man” would find the prairie suitable and would claim this homeland, too. Indians removed from the Southeast lost not only their homelands and tribal governments, but a way of life that had depended upon their familiar physical environment. All migrants to the West had to learn new ways of eking out a living from what seemed an inhospitable land.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
How did the experiences of Native American migrants to the West compare with those of white Americans? 2. Why did so many migrants to the West become sick? 3. Why was it so difficult for Native Americans and whites to adapt to new environments in the West? 


 CHAPTER 9

NATION BUILDING AND NATIONALISM

 But this picture of frontier self-reliance is not the whole story. Most settlers in fact found it extremely difficult to accomplish all the tasks using only family labor. A more common practice was the sharing of work by a number of pioneer families. Except in parts of the South, where frontier planters had taken slaves with them, the normal way to get heavy labor done in newly settled regions was through mutual aid. Assembling the neighbors to raise a house, burn the woods, roll logs, harvest wheat, husk corn, pull flax, or make quilts helped turn collective work into a festive social occasion. Passing the jug was a normal feature of these “bees,” and an uproarious good time often resulted from the various contests or competitions that speeded the work along. These communal events represented a creative response to the shortage of labor and at the same time provided a source for community solidarity. They probably tell us more about the “spirit of the frontier” than the conventional image of the pioneer as a lonely individualist. While some settlers remained in one place and “grew up with the country,” many others moved on after a relatively short time. The wandering of young Abraham Lincoln’s family from Kentucky to Indiana and finally to Illinois between 1816 and 1830 was fairly typical. The physical mobility characteristic of nineteenth-century Americans in general was particularly pronounced in frontier regions. Improved land could be sold at a profit and the proceeds used to buy new acreage beyond the horizon where the soil was reportedly richer. The temptations of small-scale land speculation and the lure of new land farther west induced a large proportion of new settlers to pull up stakes and move on after only a few years. Few early nineteenth-century American farmers developed the kind of attachment to the land that often characterized rural populations in other parts of the world. Americans who remained in the East often ignored the frontier farmers and imagined the West as an untamed American wilderness inhabited by Indians and solitary white “pathfinders” who turned their backs on civilization and learned to live in harmony with nature. James Fenimore Cooper, the first great American novelist, fostered this mythic view of the West in his stories of the frontier. He began in 1823 to publish a series of novels featuring Natty Bumppo, or “Leatherstocking”—a character who became the prototype for the western hero of popular fiction. Natty Bumppo was a hunter and scout who preferred the freedom of living in the forest to the constraints of civilization. Through Natty Bumppo, Cooper engendered a main theme of American romanticism—the superiority of a solitary life in the wilderness to the kind of settled existence among the families, schools, and churches to which most real pioneers aspired.

A
Revolution in Transportation  How did transportation networks change and improve after the War of 1812? It took more than the spread of settlements to bring prosperity to new areas and ensure that they would identify with older regions or with the country as a whole. Along the eastern seaboard, land transportation was so primitive that in 1813 it took seventy-five days for one wagon of goods drawn by four horses to make a trip of about a thousand miles from Worcester, Massachusetts, to Charleston,

 South Carolina. Coastal shipping eased the problem to some extent in the East and stimulated the growth of port cities. Traveling west over the mountains, however, meant months on the trail. After the War of 1812, political leaders realized that national security, economic progress, and political unity were all more or less dependent on a greatly improved transportation network. Accordingly, President Madison called for a federally supported program of “internal improvements” in 1815. Recommending such a program in Congress, Representative John C. Calhoun described it as a great nationalizing enterprise: “Let us, then, bind the nation together with a perfect system of roads and canals. Let us conquer space.” In ensuing decades, Calhoun’s vision of a transportation revolution was realized to a considerable extent, although the direct role of the federal government proved to be less important than anticipated.

Roads and Steamboats
 Americans who wanted to get from place to place rapidly and cheaply needed, at a bare minimum, new and improved roads. The first great federal transportation project was the building of the National Road between Cumberland, Maryland, on the Potomac and Wheeling, Virginia, on the Ohio (1811–1818). This impressive toll road had a crushed stone surface and immense stone bridges. It was subsequently extended to reach Vandalia, Illinois, in 1838. Another thoroughfare to the West completed during this period was the Lancaster Turnpike connecting Philadelphia and Pittsburgh. Other major cities were also linked by turnpikes—privately owned toll roads chartered by the states. By about 1825, thousands of miles of turnpikes crisscrossed southern New England, upstate New York, much of Pennsylvania, and northern New Jersey. By themselves, however, the toll roads failed to meet the demand for low-cost transportation over long distances. For the most part, travelers benefited more than transporters of bulky freight, for whom the turnpikes proved expensive. Even the National Road could not offer the low freight costs required for the long-distance hauling of wheat, flour, and the other bulky agricultural products of the Ohio Valley. For these commodities, water transportation of some sort was required. The United States’s natural system of river transportation was one of the most significant reasons for its rapid economic development. The Ohio-Mississippi system in particular provided ready access to the rich agricultural areas of the interior and a natural outlet for their products. By 1815, large numbers of flatboats loaded with wheat, flour, and salt pork were making a part of the 2,000-mile trip from Pittsburgh to New Orleans. Even after the coming of the steamboat, flatboats continued to carry a major share of the downriver trade. The flatboat trade, however, was necessarily one-way. A farmer from Ohio or Illinois, or someone hired to do the job, could float down to New Orleans easily enough, but there was generally no way to get back except by walking overland through rough country. Until the problem of upriver navigation was solved, the Ohio-Mississippi could not carry the manufactured goods that farmers desired in exchange for their crops. Fortunately, a solution was readily at hand: the use of steam power. Late in the eighteenth century, a number of American

A
Revolution in Transportation 

View the Map




Expanding America and Internal Improvements


 The Clermont on the Hudson (1830–1835) by Charles Pensee. Although some called his Clermont “Fulton’s Folly,” Robert Fulton immediately turned a profit from his fleet of steamboats, which reduced the cost and increased the speed of river transport.

 inventors had experimented with steam-driven riverboats. John Fitch even exhibited an early model to delegates at the Constitutional Convention. But making a commercially successful craft required further refinement. In 1807, inventor Robert Fulton demonstrated the full potential of the steamboat by successfully propelling the Clermont 150 miles up the Hudson River. The first steamboat launched in the West was the New Orleans, which made the long trip from Pittsburgh to New Orleans in 1811–1812. Besides becoming a principal means of passenger travel on the inland waterways of the East, the river steamboat revolutionized western commerce. In 1815, the Enterprise made the first return trip from New Orleans to Pittsburgh. Within five years, sixty-nine steamboats with a total capacity of 13,890 tons were plying western waters. Steam transport reduced costs, increased the speed of moving goods and people, and allowed a two-way commerce on the Mississippi and Ohio. The steamboat quickly captured the American imagination. Great paddle wheelers became luxurious floating hotels, the natural habitats of gamblers, confidence men, and mysterious women. For the pleasure of passengers and onlookers, steamboats sometimes raced against each other, and their more skillful pilots became folk heroes. But the boats also had a lamentable safety record, frequently running aground, colliding, or blowing up. The most publicized disasters of antebellum America were spectacular boiler explosions that claimed the lives of hundreds of passengers. As a result of such accidents, the federal government began in 1839 to attempt to regulate steamboats and monitor their

 construction and operation. The legislation, which failed to create an agency capable of enforcing minimum safety standards, stands as virtually the only federal effort in the pre–Civil War period to regulate domestic transportation.

The Canal Boom
 A transportation system based solely on rivers and roads had one enormous gap—it did not provide an economical way to ship western farm produce directly east to ports engaged in transatlantic trade or to the growing urban market of the seaboard states. The solution offered by the politicians and merchants of the Middle Atlantic and midwestern states was to build a system of canals that linked seaboard cities directly to the Great Lakes, the Ohio, and ultimately the Mississippi. The best natural location for a canal connecting a river flowing into the Atlantic with one of the Great Lakes was between Albany and Buffalo, a relatively flat stretch of 364 miles. The potential value of such a project had long been recognized, but when it was actually approved by the New York legislature in 1817, it was justly hailed as an enterprise of breathtaking boldness. At that time, no more than about 100 miles of canal existed in the entire United States, and the longest single canal extended only 26 miles. Credit for the project belongs mainly to New York’s vigorous and farsighted governor, De Witt Clinton. He persuaded the New York state legislature to underwrite the project by issuing bonds, and construction began in 1818.



 CHAPTER 9

NATION BUILDING AND NATIONALISM

 In less than two years, 75 miles were already finished and the first tolls were being collected. In 1825, the entire canal was opened with great public acclaim and celebration. At 364 miles long, 40 feet wide, and 4 feet deep, and containing 84 locks, the Erie Canal was the most spectacular engineering achievement of the young republic. Furthermore, it was a great economic success. It reduced the cost of moving goods from Buffalo to Albany to one-twelfth the previous rate. It not only lowered the cost of western products in the East but caused an even sharper decline in the price of goods imported from the East by Westerners and helped to make New York City the commercial capital of the nation. The great success of the Erie Canal inspired other states to extend public credit for canal building. During the 1830s and 1840s, Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Illinois embarked on ambitious canal construction projects, from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh, from the Ohio River to Cleveland, and from Chicago to the Illinois River and the Mississippi. The canal boom ended when it became apparent in the 1830s and 1840s that most of the waterways were unprofitable. State credit had been overextended, and the panic and depression of the late 1830s and early 1840s forced retrenchment. While some canals continued to be important arteries up to the time of the Civil War and well beyond, railroads were already beginning to compete successfully for the same traffic, and a new phase in the transportation revolution was beginning.

Emergence of a Market Economy
 How did developments in transportation support the growth of agriculture, banking, and industry? The desire to reduce the costs and increase the speed of shipping heavy freight over great distances laid the groundwork for a new economic system. Canals made it less expensive and more profitable for western farmers to ship wheat and flour to New York and Philadelphia and also gave manufacturers in the East ready access to an interior market. Steamboats reduced shipping costs on the Ohio and Mississippi and put farmers in the enviable position of receiving more for their crops and paying less for the goods they needed to import. Hence improved transport increased farm income and stimulated commercial agriculture.

The Beginning of Commercial
Agriculture
 At the beginning of the nineteenth century, the typical farming household consumed most of what it produced and sold only a small surplus in nearby markets. Most manufactured articles were produced at home. Easier and cheaper access to distant markets caused a decisive change in this pattern. Between 1800 and 1840, agricultural output increased at an annual rate of approximately 3 percent, and a rapidly growing portion of this production consisted of commodities grown for sale rather than consumed at home. The rise in productivity was partly due to technological advances. Iron or steel plows proved better than wooden ones,

