Chapter 28 The Onset of the Cold War


The Potsdam Summit
 “I am getting ready to go see Stalin and Churchill,” President Truman wrote to his mother in July 1945, “and it is a chore.” On board the cruiser Augusta, the new president continued to complain about the upcoming Potsdam Conference in his diary. “How I hate this trip!” he confided. “But I have to make it win, lose, or draw, and we must win. I am giving nothing away except to save starving people, and even then I hope we can only help them to help themselves.” Halfway around the world, Joseph Stalin left Moscow a day late because of a slight heart attack. The Russian leader hated to fly, so he traveled by rail. Moreover, he ordered the heavily guarded train to detour around Poland for fear of an ambush, further delaying his arrival. When he made his entrance into Potsdam, a suburb of Berlin miraculously spared the total destruction that his forces had created in the German capital, he was ready to claim the spoils of war. These two men, one the veteran revolutionary who had been in power for two decades, the other an untested leader in office for barely three months, symbolized the enormous differences that now separated the wartime allies. Stalin was above all a realist. Brutal in securing total control at home, he was more flexible in his foreign policy, bent on exploiting Russia’s victory in World War II rather than aiming at world domination. Cunning and caution were the hallmarks of his diplomatic style.

 Small in stature, ungainly in build, he radiated a catlike quality as he waited behind his unassuming façade, ready to dazzle an opponent with his “brilliant, terrifying tactical mastery.” Truman, in contrast, personified traditional Wilsonian idealism. Lacking Roosevelt’s guile, the new president placed his faith in international cooperation. Like many Americans, he believed implicitly in his country’s innate goodness. Self-assured to the point of cockiness, he came to Potsdam clothed in the armor of self-righteousness. Truman and Stalin met for the first time on July 17, 1945. “I told Stalin that I am no diplomat,” the president recorded in his diary, “but usually said yes and no to questions after hearing all the argument.” The Russian dictator’s reaction to Truman remains a mystery, but Truman believed the first encounter went well. “I can deal with Stalin,” he wrote. “He is honest—but smart as hell.” Together with Winston Churchill and his replacement, Clement Attlee, whose Labour party had just triumphed in British elections, Truman and Stalin clashed for the next ten days over such difficult issues as reparations, the Polish border, and the fate of eastern Europe. Truman presented the ideas and proposals formulated by his advisers; he saw his task as essentially procedural, and when he presided, he moved the agenda along in brisk fashion. After he

 Churchill, Truman, and Stalin during the Potsdam Conference in July 1945. The conference revealed the growing divergence among the wartime allies that soon led to the onset of the Cold War.



 CHAPTER 28

THE ONSET OF THE COLD WAR

 had “banged through” three items one day, he commented, “I am not going to stay around this terrible place all summer, just to listen to speeches. I’ll go home to the Senate for that.” In an indirect, roundabout way, he informed Stalin of the existence of the atomic bomb, tested successfully in the New Mexico desert just before the conference began. Truman offered no details, and the impassive Stalin asked for none, commenting only that he hoped the United States would make “good use of it against the Japanese.” Reparations proved to be the crucial issue at Potsdam. The Russians wanted to rebuild their war- ravaged economy with German industry; the United States feared it would be saddled with the entire cost of caring for the defeated Germans. A compromise was finally reached. Each side would take reparations primarily from its own occupation zone, a solution that foreshadowed the future division of Germany. “Because they could not agree on how to govern Europe,” wrote historian Daniel Yergin, “Truman and Stalin began to divide it.” The other issues were referred to the newly created Council of Foreign Ministers, which would meet in the fall in London. he Potsdam Conference thus ended on an apparent note of harmony; beneath the surface, however, the bitter antagonism of the Cold War was festering. A dozen years later, Truman reminisced to an old associate about Potsdam. “What a show that was!” Describing himself as “an innocent idealist” surrounded by wolves, he claimed that all the agreements reached there were “broken as soon as the unconscionable Russian Dictator returned to Moscow!” He added ruefully, “And I liked the little son of a bitch.” Potsdam marked the end of the wartime alliance. America and Russia, each distrustful of the other, began to engage in a long and bitter confrontation. For the next decade, the two superpowers would vie for control of postwar Europe, and later clash over the spread of communism to Asia. By the time Truman’s and Stalin’s successors met for the next summit conference at Geneva in 1955, the Cold War was at its height.

T


The Cold War Begins
 How did the Cold War begin? The conflict between the United States and the Soviet Union began gradually. For two years, the nations tried to adjust their differences over the division of Europe, postwar economic aid, and the atomic bomb through discussion and negotiation. The Council of Foreign Ministers provided the forum. Beginning in London during the fall of 1945 and meeting with their Russian counterparts in Paris, New York, and Moscow, American diplomats searched for a way to live in peace with a suspicious Soviet Union.

The Division of Europe
 The fundamental disagreement was over who would control postwar Europe. In the east, the Red Army had swept over Poland and the Balkans, laying the basis for Soviet domination there. American and British forces had liberated western Europe from Scandinavia to Italy. The Russians, mindful of past invasions from the west across the plains of Poland, were intent on imposing communist governments loyal to Moscow in the Soviet sphere. The United States, on the other hand, upheld the principle of national self-determination, insisting the people in each country should freely choose their postwar rulers. The Soviets saw the demand for free elections as subversive, since they knew that popularly chosen regimes would be unfriendly to Russia. Suspecting American duplicity, Stalin brought down an Iron Curtain (Churchill’s phrase) from the Baltic to the Adriatic as he created a series of satellite governments. Germany was the key. The temporary zones of occupation gradually hardened into permanent lines of division. Ignoring the Potsdam Conference agreement that the country be treated as an economic unit, the United States and Great Britain were, by 1946, refusing to permit the Russians to take reparations from the industrial western zones. The initial harsh occupation policy gave way to more humane treatment of the German people and a slow but steady economic recovery. The United States and England merged their zones and championed the idea of the unification of all Germany. Russia, fearing a resurgence of German military power, responded by intensifying the communization of its zone, which included the jointly occupied city of Berlin. By 1947, England, France, and the United States were laying plans to transfer their authority to an independent West Germany. The Soviet Union consolidated its grip on eastern Europe in 1946 and 1947. One by one, communist regimes replaced coalition governments in Poland, Hungary, Romania, and Bulgaria. Moving cautiously to avoid provoking the West, Stalin used communism as a means to dominate half of Europe, both to protect the security of the Soviet state and to advance its international power. The climax came in March 1948 when a coup in Czechoslovakia overthrew a democratic government and gave the Soviets a strategic foothold in central Europe. The division of Europe was an inevitable aftereffect of World War II. Both sides were intent on imposing their values in the areas liberated by their troops. The Russians were no more likely to withdraw from eastern Europe than the United States and Britain were from Germany, France, and Italy. A frank recognition of competing spheres of influence might have avoided further escalation of tension. But the Western nations, remembering Hitler’s aggression in the 1930s, began to see Stalin as an equally dangerous threat to their well-being. Instead of accepting him as a cautious leader bent on protecting Russian security, they perceived him as an aggressive dictator leading a communist drive for world domination.

Withholding Economic Aid
 World War II had inflicted enormous damage on Russia. The brutal fighting had taken between fifteen and twenty million Russian lives, destroyed more than thirty thousand factories, and torn up forty thousand miles of railroad track. The industrialization

The Cold War Begins


Read the Document




 Churchill’s “Iron Curtain” Speech (March 5, 1946)

 ICELAND

Hamburg


 Western bloc Communist bloc/ Soviet zone

Hanover
Berlin


 Nonaligned nations

 British zone

 FINLAND

“Iron Curtain”
 NORWAY



 SWEDEN

 500 miles

 Soviet zone

 500 kilometers North Sea IRELAND

 DEN.

SOVIET UNION

UNITED KINGDOM

French
 zone

Frankfurt


 American zone

NETH. POLAND BELG.

ATLANTIC OCEAN

GERMANY CZECH.

LUX. FRANCE

 SWITZ.

 AUS.



 ROMANIA

 100 miles Berlin airlift, 1948–1949

 100 kilometers

 BULG.

 ITALY

 SPAIN



 a ck Se Bla

 YUGOSLAVIA

 PORTUGAL



 HUN.

French


ALB. TURKEY SP. MOROCCO

 GREECE

British


BERLIN
Soviet American 
 MOROCCO (Fr.)

 ALGERIA (Fr.)

 TUNISIA (Fr.)

Medi


Cyprus


 terranea n Sea

EUROPE AFTER WORLD WAR II

 The heavy red line splitting Germany shows in graphic form the division of Europe between the Western and Soviet spheres of influence. “From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic,” said Winston Churchill in a speech at Fulton, Missouri, in 1946, “an iron curtain has descended across the continent.”

 that Stalin had achieved at such great sacrifice in the 1930s had been badly set back; even agricultural production had fallen by half during the war. Outside aid and assistance were vital for the reconstruction of the Soviet Union. American leaders knew of Russia’s plight and hoped to use it to good advantage. Wartime ambassador Averell Harriman wrote in 1944 that economic aid was “one of the most effective weapons at our disposal” in dealing with Russia. President Truman was convinced that economically “we held all the cards and the Russians had to come to us.” There were two possible forms of postwar assistance: loans and Lend-Lease. In January 1945, the Soviets requested a $6 billion loan to finance postwar reconstruction. Despite initial American encouragement, President Roosevelt deferred action on this request; as relations with Russia cooled, the chances for action dimmed. “Our experience,” commented Harriman in April 1945, had “incontrovertibly proved it was not possible to bank goodwill in Moscow.” By the war’s end, the loan request, though never formally turned down, was dead.

 Lend-Lease proved no more successful. In the spring of 1945, Congress instructed the administration not to use Lend-Lease for postwar reconstruction. President Truman went further, however, by signing an order on May 11, 1945, terminating all shipments to Russia, including those already at sea. The State Department saw the action as applying “leverage against the Soviet Union”; Stalin termed it “brutal.” Heeding Russian protests, Truman resumed Lend-Lease shipments, but only until the war was over in August. After that, all Lend-Lease ended. Deprived of American assistance, the Russians were forced to rebuild their economy through reparations. American and British resistance prevented them from taking reparations in western Germany, but the Soviets systematically removed factories and plants from other areas they controlled, including their zone of Germany, eastern Europe, and Manchuria. Slowly, the Russian economy recovered from the war, but the bitterness over the American refusal to extend aid convinced Stalin of Western hostility and thus deepened the growing antagonism between the Soviet Union and the United States.



 CHAPTER 28

THE ONSET OF THE COLD WAR

The Atomic Dilemma
 Overshadowing all else was the atomic bomb. Used by the United States with deadly success at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the new weapon raised problems that would have been difficult for even friendly nations to resolve. Given the uneasy state of Soviet– American relations, the effect was disastrous. The wartime policy followed by Roosevelt and Churchill ensured a postwar nuclear arms race. Instead of informing their major ally of the developing atomic bomb, they kept it a closely guarded secret. Stalin learned of the Manhattan Project through espionage and responded by starting a Soviet atomic program in 1943. By the time Truman informed Stalin of the weapon’s existence at Potsdam, the Russians, aided by a steady stream of information from spies in the United States, were well on the way to making their own bomb. After the war, the United States developed a disarmament plan that would turn control of fissionable material, then the processing plants, and ultimately the American stockpile of bombs over to an international agency. When President Truman appointed financier Bernard Baruch to present this proposal to the United Nations, Baruch insisted on changing it in several important ways, adding sanctions against violators and exempting the international agency from the UN veto. Ignoring scientists who pleaded for a more cooperative position, Baruch followed instead the advice of Army Chief of Staff Dwight D. Eisenhower, who cited the rapid demobilization of the American armed forces (from nearly twelve million personnel in 1945 to fewer than two million in 1947) to argue that “we cannot at this time limit our capability to produce or use this weapon.” In effect, the Baruch Plan, with its multiple stages and emphasis on inspection, would preserve the American atomic monopoly for the indefinite future. The Soviets responded predictably. Diplomat Andrei Gromyko presented a simple plan calling for a total ban on the production and use of the new weapon as well as the destruction of all existing bombs. The Russian proposal was founded on the same perception of national self-interest as the Baruch Plan. Although Russia had also demobilized rapidly, it still had nearly three million men under arms in 1947 and wanted to maximize its conventional strength by outlawing the atomic bomb. No agreement was possible. Neither the United States nor the Soviet Union could abandon its position without surrendering a vital national interest. Wanting to preserve its monopoly, America stressed inspection and control; hoping to neutralize the U.S. advantage, Russia advocated immediate disarmament. The nuclear dilemma, inherent in the Soviet-American rivalry, blocked any negotiated settlement. Instead, the two superpowers agreed to disagree. Trusting neither each other nor any form of international cooperation, each concentrated on taking maximum advantage of its wartime gains. Thus the Russians exploited the territory they had conquered in Europe while the United States retained its economic and strategic advantages over the Soviet Union. The result was the Cold War.

 orderly of mind, Marshall had the capability—honed in World War II—to think in broad strategic terms. An extraordinarily good judge of ability, he relied on gifted subordinates to handle the day-to-day implementation of his policies. In the months after taking office, he came to rely on two men in particular: Dean Acheson and George Kennan. Acheson, an experienced Washington lawyer and bureaucrat, was appointed undersecretary of state and given free rein by Marshall to conduct American diplomacy. In appearance, he seemed more British than American, with his impeccable Ivy League clothes and bushy mustache. A man of keen intelligence, he had a carefully cultivated reputation for arrogance and a low tolerance for mediocrity. As an ardent Anglophile, he wanted to see the United States take over a faltering Britain’s role as the supreme arbiter of world affairs. Recalling the lesson of Munich, he opposed appeasement and advocated a policy of negotiating only from strength. George Kennan, Marshall’s other mainstay, headed the newly created Policy Planning Staff. A career foreign service officer, Kennan had become a Soviet expert, mastering Russian history and culture as well as speaking the language fluently. He served in Moscow after

Read the Document


George F. Kennan,
“The Long Telegram” (1946)


Containment
 What was containment, and why was it adopted? A major departure in American foreign policy occurred in January 1947, when General George C. Marshall, the wartime army chief of staff, became secretary of state. Calm, mature, and

 George F. Kennan (1904–2005) was an American political advisor, diplomat, political scientist, and historian. Kennan was instrumental in developing the policy of containment concerning the Soviet Union that dominated the immediate post–World War II era.

Containment


Read the Document


George Marshall, The Marshall Plan (1947)




 ICELAND

 U.S. aid per country in millions of dollars



 containment of Russian expansive tendencies.” Such a policy of halting Soviet aggression would not lead to any immediate victory, Kennan warned. In the long run, however, he believed that the United States could force the Soviet Union to adopt more reasonable policies and live in peace with the West.

The Truman Doctrine


Ba
 ltic Sea

 The initial step toward containment came in response to an urgent British request. Since March 1946, SWEDEN FINLAND England had been supporting the Greek government in a bitter civil NORWAY war against Communist guerrillas. North Oslo Stockholm Sea On February 21, 1947, the British Moscow UNITED informed the United States that they KINGDOM could no longer afford to aid Greece DEN. London or Turkey, the latter under heavy presDublin Copenhagen SOVIET UNION IRELAND EAST sure from the Soviets for access to the GERMANY Mediterranean. Believing the Russians Berlin Warsaw NETH. responsible for the strife in Greece POLAND ATLANTIC BELG. WEST (in fact, they were not), Marshall, GERMANY OCEAN Paris CZECH. Acheson, and Kennan quickly decided LUX. Vienna the United States would have to FRANCE Budapest AUS. SWITZ. assume Britain’s role in the eastern HUN. ROMANIA Trieste Mediterranean. Bucharest Belgrade Black Worried about congressional supSea YUGO. port, especially since the Republicans BULGARIA Madrid PORTUGAL Sofia had gained control of Congress in 1946, Lisbon Istanbul Rome ITALY ALB. SPAIN Marshall called a meeting with the legislative leadership in late February. He Mediter outlined the problem; then Acheson ran TURKEY Athens ea n GREECE took over to warn that “a highly posSe a sible Soviet breakthrough might open ALGERIA TUNISIA MOROCCO three continents to Soviet penetration.” Comparing the situation in Greece MARSHALL PLAN AID TO EUROPE, 1948–1952 The Marshall Plan, also known as the to one rotten apple spoiling an entire European Recovery Program, provided aid totaling $13 billion to European countries following World War II. barrel, Acheson warned that “the corMost went to former allies Great Britain and France but former enemies Italy and West Germany also received ruption of Greece would infect Iran substantial aid. To receive the grants, countries pledged to control inflation and lower tariffs. and all to the east. It would also carry U.S. recognition in 1933 and again during World War II, developing infection to Africa through Asia Minor and Egypt, and to Europe there a profound distrust for the Soviet regime. In a crucial telegram through Italy and France.” Claiming that the Soviets were “playing in 1946, he warned that the Kremlin believed “that there can be no one of the greatest gambles in history,” Acheson concluded that “we compromise with rival power” and advocated a policy of containand we alone were in a position to break up the play.” ment, arguing that only strong and sustained resistance could halt The bipartisan group of congressional leaders was deeply the outward flow of Russian power. As self-assured as Acheson, impressed. Finally, Republican Senator Arthur M. Vandenberg Kennan believed that neither Congress nor public opinion should spoke up, saying he would support the president, but adding that interfere with the conduct of foreign policy by the experts. to ensure public backing, Truman would have to “scare hell” out of In the spring of 1947, a sense of crisis impelled Marshall, the American people. Acheson, and Kennan to set out on a new course in American The president followed the senator’s advice. On March 12, 1947, diplomacy. Dubbed containment, after an article by Kennan in he asked Congress for $400 million for military and economic assisForeign Affairs, the new policy both consolidated the evolving tance to Greece and Turkey. In stating what would become known postwar anticommunism and established guidelines that would as the Truman Doctrine, he made clear that more was involved shape America’s role in the world for more than two decades. What than just these two countries—the stakes, in fact, were far higher. “It Kennan proposed was “a long-term, patient but firm, and vigilant must be the policy of the United States,” Truman told the Congress,



 CHAPTER 28

THE ONSET OF THE COLD WAR

 “to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressure.” After a brief debate, both the House and the Senate approved the program by margins of better than three to one. The Truman Doctrine marked an informal declaration of cold war against the Soviet Union. Truman used the crisis in Greece to secure congressional approval and build a national consensus for the policy of containment. In less than two years, the civil war in Greece ended, but the American commitment to oppose communist expansion, whether by internal subversion or external aggression, placed the United States on a collision course with the Soviet Union around the globe.

The Marshall Plan
 Despite American interest in controlling Soviet expansion into Greece, western Europe was far more vital to U.S. interests than was the eastern Mediterranean. Yet by 1947, many Americans believed that western Europe was open to Soviet penetration. The problem was economic in nature. Despite $9 billion in piecemeal American loans, England, France, Italy, and the other European countries had great difficulty in recovering from World War II. Food was scarce, with millions existing on less than fifteen hundred calories a day; industrial machinery was broken down and obsolete; and workers were demoralized by years of depression and war. The cruel winter of 1947, the worst in fifty years, compounded the problem. Resentment and discontent led to growing communist voting strength, especially in Italy and France. If the United States could not reverse the process, it seemed as though all of Europe might drift into the communist orbit. In the weeks following proclamation of the Truman Doctrine, American officials dealt with this problem. Secretary of State Marshall, returning from a frustrating Council of Foreign Ministers meeting in Moscow, warned that “the patient is sinking while the doctors deliberate.” Acheson believed that it was time to extend American “economic power” in Europe, both “to call an effective halt to the Soviet Union’s expansionism” and “to create a basis for political stability and economic well-being.” The experts drew up a plan for the massive infusion of American capital to finance the economic recovery of Europe. Speaking at a Harvard commencement on June 5, 1947, Marshall presented the broad outline. He offered extensive economic aid to all the nations of Europe if they could reach agreement on ways to achieve “the revival of a working economy in the world so as to permit the emergence of political and social conditions in which free institutions can exist.” The fate of the Marshall Plan depended on the reaction of the Soviet Union and the U.S. Congress. Marshall had taken, in the words of one American diplomat, “a hell of a gamble” by including Russia in his offer of aid. At a meeting of the European nations in Paris in July 1947, the Soviet foreign minister ended the suspense by abruptly withdrawing. Neither the Soviet Union nor its satellites would take part, apparently because Moscow saw the Marshall Plan as an American attempt to weaken Soviet control over eastern Europe. The other European countries then made a formal request for $17 billion in assistance over the next four years. Congress responded cautiously to the proposal, appointing a special joint committee to investigate. The administration lobbied vigorously, pointing out that the Marshall Plan would help the United States by stimulating trade with Europe as well as checking

 Soviet expansion. It was the latter argument, however, that proved decisive. When the Czech coup touched off a war scare in March 1948, Congress quickly approved the Marshall Plan by heavy majorities. Over the next four years, the huge American investment paid rich dividends, generating a broad industrial revival in western Europe that became self-sustaining by the 1950s. The threat of communist domination faded, and a prosperous Europe proved to be a bonanza for American farmers, miners, and manufacturers.

The Western Military Alliance
 The third and final phase of containment came in 1949 with the establishment of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). NATO grew out of European fears of Russian military aggression. Recalling Hitler’s tactics in the 1930s, the people of western Europe wanted assurance that the United States would protect them from attack as they began to achieve economic recovery. American diplomats were sympathetic. “People could not go ahead and make investments for the future,” commented Averell Harriman, “without some sense of security.” England, France, and the Low Countries (Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg) began the process in March 1948 when they signed the Brussels Treaty, providing for collective self-defense. In January 1949, President Truman called for a broader defense pact including the United States; ten European nations, from Norway in the north to Italy in the south, joined the United States and Canada in signing the North Atlantic Treaty in Washington on April 4, 1949. This historic departure from the traditional policy of isolation—the United States had not signed such a treaty since the French alliance in the eighteenth century—caused extensive debate, but the Senate ratified it in July by a vote of 82 to 13. There were two main features of NATO. First, the United States committed itself to the defense of Europe in the key clause, which stated that “an armed attack against one or more shall be considered an attack against them all.” In effect, the United States was extending its atomic shield over Europe. The second feature was designed to reassure worried Europeans that the United States would honor this commitment. In late 1950, President Truman appointed General Dwight D. Eisenhower to the post of NATO supreme commander and authorized the stationing of four American divisions in Europe to serve as the nucleus of the NATO army. It was believed the threat of American troop involvement in any Russian assault would deter the Soviet Union from making such an attack. The Western military alliance escalated the developing Cold War. Whatever its advantage in building a sense of security among worried Europeans, it represented an overreaction to the Soviet danger. Americans and Europeans alike were attempting to apply the lesson of Munich to the Cold War. But Stalin was not Hitler, and the Soviets were not the Nazis. There was no evidence of any Russian plan to invade western Europe, and in the face of the American atomic bomb, none was likely. NATO only intensified Russian fears of the West and thus increased the level of international tension.

The Berlin Blockade
 The main Russian response to containment came in 1948 at the West’s most vulnerable point. American, British, French, and Soviet troops each occupied a sector of Berlin, but the city was

The Cold War Expands


 located more than a hundred miles within the Russian zone of Germany (see the map of postwar Europe on p. 669). Stalin decided to test his opponents’ resolve by cutting off all rail and highway traffic to Berlin on June 20, 1948. The timing was very awkward for Harry Truman. He had his hands full resisting efforts to force him off the Democratic ticket, and he faced a difficult reelection effort against a strong Republican candidate, Governor Thomas E. Dewey of New York. Immersed in election-year politics, Truman was caught unprepared by the Berlin blockade. The alternatives were not very appealing. The United States could withdraw its forces and lose not just a city, but the confidence of all Europe; it could try to send in reinforcements and fight for Berlin; or it could sit tight and attempt to find a diplomatic solution. Truman made the basic decision in characteristic fashion, telling the military that there would be no thought of pulling out. “We were going to stay, period,” an aide reported Truman as saying. In the next few weeks, the president and his advisers developed ways to implement the decision. Rejecting proposals for provoking a showdown by sending an armored column down the main highway, the administration adopted a two-phase policy. The first part was a massive airlift of food, fuel, and supplies for the ten thousand troops and the two million civilians in Berlin. A fleet of fifty-two C-54s and eighty C-47s began making two daily round-trip flights to Berlin, carrying 2,500 tons every twenty-four hours. Then, to guard against Soviet interruption of the Berlin airlift, Truman transferred sixty American B-29s, planes capable of delivering atomic bombs, to bases in England. The president was bluffing; the B-29s were not equipped with atomic bombs, but at the time, the threat was effective. For a few weeks, the world teetered on the edge of war. Stalin did not attempt to disrupt the flights to Berlin, but he rejected all American diplomatic initiatives. Although at any time the Russians could have halted it by jamming radar or shooting down the defenseless cargo planes, the airlift gradually increased to more than 4,000 tons a day. Governor Dewey patriotically supported the president’s policy, thus removing foreign policy from the presidential campaign. Yet for Truman, the tension was fierce. In early September, he asked his advisers to brief him “on bases, bombs, Moscow, Leningrad, etc.” “I have a terrible feeling afterward that we are very close to war,” he confided in his diary. “I hope not.” Slowly, the tension eased. The Russians did not shoot down any planes, and the daily airlift climbed to nearly 7,000 tons. Truman, a decided underdog, won a surprising second term in November over a complacent Dewey, in part because the Berlin crisis had rallied the nation behind his leadership. In early 1949, the Soviets gave in, ending the blockade in return for another meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers on Germany—a conclave that proved as unproductive as all the earlier ones. The Berlin crisis marked the end of the initial phase of the Cold War. The airlift had given the United States a striking political victory, showing the world the triumph of American ingenuity over Russian stubbornness. Yet it could not disguise the fact that the Cold War had cut Europe in two. Behind the Iron Curtain, the Russians had consolidated control over the areas won by their troops in the war, while the United States had used the Marshall Plan to revitalize western Europe. But a divided continent was a far cry from the wartime hopes for a peaceful world. And the rivalry that began in Europe would soon spread into a worldwide contest among the super powers.



The Cold War Expands
 How did the Cold War expand from Europe to Asia? The rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union grew in the late 1940s and early 1950s. Both sides began to rebuild their military forces with new methods and new weapons. Equally significant, the diplomatic competition spread from Europe to Asia as each of the superpowers sought to enhance its influence in the Far East. By the time Truman left office in early 1953, the Cold War had taken on global proportions.

The Military Dimension
 After World War II, American leaders were intent on reforming the nation’s military system in light of their wartime experience. Two goals were uppermost. First, nearly everyone agreed in the aftermath of Pearl Harbor that the U.S. armed services should be unified into an integrated military system. The developing Cold War reinforced this decision. Without unification, declared George Marshall in 1945, “there can be little hope that we will be able to maintain through the years a military posture that will secure for us a lasting peace.” Equally important, planners realized, was the need for new institutions to coordinate military and diplomatic strategy so the nation could cope effectively with threats to its security. In 1947, Congress passed the National Security Act. It established a Department of Defense, headed by a civilian secretary of cabinet rank presiding over three separate services—the army, the navy, and the new air force. In addition, the act created the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to coordinate the intelligence-gathering activities of various government agencies. Finally, the act provided for a National Security Council (NSC)—composed of the service secretaries, the secretary of defense, and the secretary of state—to advise the president on all matters regarding the nation’s security. Despite the appearance of equality among the services, the air force quickly emerged as the dominant power in the atomic age, based on its capability both to deter an enemy from attacking and to wage war if deterrence failed. President Truman, intent on cutting back defense expenditures, favored the air force in his 1949 military budget, allotting this branch more than one-half the total sum. After the Czech coup and the resulting war scare, Congress granted an additional $3 billion to the military. The appropriation included funds for a new B-36 to replace the B-29 as the nation’s primary strategic bomber. American military planners received even greater support in the fall of 1949 when the Soviet Union exploded its first atomic bomb. President Truman appointed a high-level committee to explore mounting an all-out effort to build a hydrogen bomb to maintain American nuclear supremacy. Some scientists had technical objections to the H-bomb, which was still far from being perfected, while others opposed the new weapon on moral grounds, claiming that its enormous destructive power (intended to be one thousand times greater than the atomic bomb) made it unthinkable. George Kennan suggested a new effort at international arms control with the Soviets, but Dean Acheson—who succeeded Marshall as secretary of state in early 1949—believed it was imperative that the United States develop the hydrogen bomb before the Soviet Union. When



 CHAPTER 28

THE ONSET OF THE COLD WAR

View the Closer Look


Berlin Airlift


 The Berlin airlift (June 1948–May 1949) was organized by the Truman administration and the Western Allies to overcome the rail, roadways, and canals blockade of West Berlin instituted by the Soviet Union. Over two hundred thousand American and British air force flights over West Berlin delivered approximately nearly five thousand tons of food and other necessities to West Berliners in order to break successfully the Soviet blockade.

 Acheson presented the committee’s favorable report to the president in January 1950, Truman took only seven minutes to decide to go ahead with the awesome new weapon. At the same time, Acheson ordered the Policy Planning Staff (headed by Paul Nitze after Kennan resigned in protest) to draw up a new statement of national defense policy. NSC-68, as the document eventually became known, was based on the premise that the Soviet Union sought “to impose its absolute authority over the rest of the world” and thus “mortally challenged” the United States. Rejecting such options as appeasement or a return to isolation, Nitze advocated a massive expansion of American military power so the United States could halt and overcome the Soviet threat. Contending the nation could afford to spend “upward of 50 percent of its gross national product” for security, NSC-68 proposed increasing defense spending from $13 to $45 billion annually. Approved in principle by the National Security Council in April 1950, NSC-68

 stood as a symbol of the Truman administration’s determination to win the Cold War regardless of cost.

The Cold War in Asia
 The Soviet–American conflict developed more slowly in Asia. At Yalta, the two superpowers had agreed to a Far Eastern balance of power, with the Russians dominating Northeast Asia and the Americans in control of the Pacific, including both Japan and its former island empire. The United States moved quickly to consolidate its sphere of influence. General Douglas MacArthur, in charge of Japanese occupation, denied the Soviet Union any role in the reconstruction of Japan. Instead, he supervised the transition of the Japanese government into a constitutional democracy, shaped along Western lines, in which Communists were barred from all government posts. The Japanese willingly renounced war in their new constitution, relying instead

The Cold War Expands


 on American forces to protect their security. American policy was equally nationalistic in the Pacific. A trusteeship arrangement with the United Nations merely disguised the fact that the United States held full control over the Marshall, Mariana, and Caroline Islands. American scientists conducted atomic bomb tests at Bikini atoll in 1946, and by 1949, MacArthur was declaring that the entire Pacific “had become an Anglo-Saxon lake and our line of defense runs through the chain of islands fringing the coast of Asia.” As defined at Yalta, China lay between the Soviet and American spheres. When World War II ended, the country was torn between Chiang Kai-shek’s Nationalists in the South and Mao Tse-tung’s Communists in the North. Chiang had many advantages, including American political and economic backing and official Soviet recognition. But corruption was widespread among the Nationalist leaders, and a raging inflation that soon reached 100 percent a year devastated the Chinese middle classes and thus eroded Chiang’s base of power. Mao used tight discipline and patriotic appeals to strengthen his hold on the peasantry and extend his influence. When the Soviets abruptly vacated Manchuria in 1946, after stripping it of virtually all the industrial machinery Japan had installed, Mao inherited control of this rich northern province. Ignoring American advice, Chiang rushed north to occupy Manchurian cities, overextending his supply lines and exposing his forces to Communist counterattack. American policy sought to prevent a Chinese civil war. Before he became secretary of state, George Marshall undertook the difficult task of forming a coalition government between Chiang and Mao. For a few months in early 1946, Marshall appeared to have succeeded, but Chiang’s attempts to gain control of Manchuria doomed the agreement. In reality, there was no basis for compromise. Chiang insisted he “was going to liquidate Communists,” while Mao was trying to play the United States against Russia in his bid for power. By 1947, as China plunged into full-scale civil war, the Truman administration had given up any meaningful effort to influence the outcome. Political mediation had failed, military intervention was out of the question so soon after World War II, and a policy of continued American economic aid served only to appease domestic supporters of Chiang Kai-shek; 80 percent of the military supplies ended up in Communist hands. The Chinese conflict climaxed at the end of the decade. Mao’s forces drove the Nationalists out of Manchuria in late 1948 and advanced across the Yangtze by mid-1949. Acheson released a lengthy report justifying American policy in China on the grounds that the civil war there “was beyond the control of the government of the United States.” An American military adviser concurred, telling Congress that the Nationalist defeat was due to “the world’s worst leadership” and “a complete loss of will to fight.” Republican senators, however, disagreed, blaming American diplomats for sabotaging the Nationalists and terming Acheson’s report “a 1054-page white-wash of a wishful, do-nothing policy.” While the domestic debate raged over responsibility for the loss of China, Chiang’s forces fled the mainland for sanctuary on Formosa (Taiwan) in December 1949. Two months later, Mao and Stalin signed a Sino-Soviet treaty of mutual assistance that clearly placed China in the Russian orbit. The American response to the Communist triumph in China was twofold. First, the State Department refused to recognize the legitimacy of the new regime in Beijing, maintaining instead formal diplomatic relations with the Nationalists on Formosa. Citing the Sino–Soviet alliance, Assistant Secretary of State Dean Rusk called



 the Beijing regime “a colonial Russian government” and declared, “It is not the Government of China. It does not pass the first test. It is not Chinese.” Then, to compensate for the loss of China, the United States focused on Japan as its main ally in Asia. The State Department encouraged the buildup of Japanese industry, and the Pentagon expanded American bases on the Japanese home islands and Okinawa. A Japanese-American security pact led to the end of American occupation by 1952. The Cold War had now split east Asia in two.

The Korean War
 The showdown between the United States and the Soviet Union in Asia came in Korea. Traditionally the cockpit of international rivalry in Northeast Asia, Korea had been divided at the

View the Map


The Korean War (1950–1953)


SOVIET UNION

 CHINA

 lu Ya

Farthest
 UN advance Nov. 1950

R.


Sea of
Japan


NORTH KOREA

Pyongyang


Truce Line
Panmunjom
 38th Parallel Seoul Inchon Landing Sept. 15, 1950

Pusan Perimeter
Farthest North
 Korean advance Sept. 1950

SOUTH KOREA
Pusan 
Yellow
Sea






 150 miles 150 kilometers

International
 boundaries, 1950

 UN offensive, Sept.–Nov. 1950

 North Korean invasion, June–Sept. 1950

Communist Chinese
 offensive, Nov. 1950–Jan. 1951

THE KOREAN WAR, 1950–1953
After a year of rapid movement up and down the Korean peninsula, the fighting stalled just north of the 38th parallel. The resulting truce line has divided North and South Korea since the July 1953 armistice. 


 CHAPTER 28

THE ONSET OF THE COLD WAR

 38th parallel in 1945. The Russians occupied the industrial North, installing a communist government under the leadership of Kim Il-Sung. In the agrarian South, Syngman Rhee, a conservative nationalist, emerged as the American-sponsored ruler. Neither regime heeded a UN call for elections to unify the country. The two superpowers pulled out most of their occupation forces by 1949. The Russians, however, helped train a well-equipped army in the North, while the United States—fearful Rhee would seek unification through armed conquest—gave much more limited military assistance to South Korea. On June 25, 1950, the North Korean army suddenly crossed the 38th parallel in great strength. Stalin had approved this act of aggression in advance. In January 1950, the Soviet leader had told Mao Tse-tung that he was ready to overthrow the Yalta settlement in the Far East (“and to hell with it,” he exclaimed to Mao). In April, when Kim Il-Sung came to Moscow to gain approval for the assault on South Korea, Stalin gave it willingly, apparently in the belief that the United States was ready to abandon Syngman Rhee. But the ever-cautious Stalin warned Kim not to count on Soviet assistance, saying, “If you should get kicked in the teeth, I shall not lift a finger. You have to ask Mao for all the help.” In May, despite expressing some reservations, Mao also approved the planned North Korean aggression. Both Stalin and Mao had badly miscalculated the American response. President Truman saw the invasion as a clear-cut case of Soviet aggression reminiscent of the 1930s. “Communism was acting in Korea just as Hitler, Mussolini, and the Japanese had acted ten, fifteen, and twenty years earlier,” he commented in his memoirs. Following Acheson’s advice, the president convened the UN Security Council and, taking advantage of a temporary Soviet boycott, secured a resolution condemning North Korea as an aggressor and calling on the member nations to engage in a collective security action. Within a few days, American troops from Japan were in combat in South Korea. The conflict, which would last for more than three years, was technically a police action fought under UN auspices; in reality, the United States was at war with a Soviet satellite in Asia. In the beginning, the fighting went badly as the North Koreans continued to drive down the peninsula. But by August, American forces had halted the communist advance near Pusan. In September, General MacArthur changed the whole complexion of the war by carrying out a brilliant amphibious assault at Inchon, on the waist of Korea, cutting off and destroying most of the North Korean army in the South. Encouraged by this victory, Truman began to shift from his original goal of restoring the 38th parallel to a new one: the unification of Korea by military force. The administration ignored Beijing’s repeated warnings not to invade North Korea. “I should think it would be sheer madness for the Chinese to intervene,” commented Acheson. Despite CIA reports of a massive Chinese force assembling in Manchuria, President Truman and his advisers continued to believe that the Soviet Union, not ready for all-out war, would hold China in check. General MacArthur was equally certain that China would not attack his troops in Korea. “We are no longer fearful of their intervention,” he told Truman in October, adding that if they crossed the Yalu into Korea, “there would be the greatest slaughter.”

 Rarely has an American president received worse advice. China was not a Soviet puppet. When UN forces crossed the 38th parallel and moved confidently toward the Yalu, the Chinese launched a devastating counterattack in late November which caught MacArthur by surprise and drove his armies out of North Korea by the end of the year. MacArthur finally stabilized the fighting near the 38th parallel, but when Truman decided to give up his attempt to unify Korea, the general protested to Congress, calling for a renewed offensive and proclaiming, “There is no substitute for victory.” Truman courageously relieved the popular hero of the Pacific of his command on April 11, 1951. At first, MacArthur seemed likely to force the president to back down. Huge crowds came forward to welcome him home and hear him call for victory over the Communists in Asia. At a special congressional hearing, the administration struck back effectively by warning that MacArthur’s strategy would expose all Europe to Soviet attack. General Omar Bradley, Truman’s chief military adviser, succinctly pointed out that a “showdown” with communism in Asia would be “the wrong war, at the wrong place, at the wrong time, and with the wrong enemy.” Congress and the American people came to accept MacArthur’s recall. The Korean War settled into a stalemate near the 38th parallel as truce talks with the communists bogged down. The president had achieved his primary goal, defense of South Korea and the principle of collective security. Yet by taking the gamble to unify Korea by force, he had confused the American people and embarrassed the United States in the eyes of the world. In the last analysis, the most significant result of the Korean conflict was the massive American rearmament it brought about. The war led to the implementation of NSC-68—the army expanded to 3.5 million troops, the defense budget increased to $50 billion a year by 1952, and the United States acquired distant military bases from Saudi Arabia to Morocco. America was now committed to waging a global contest against the Soviet Union with arms as well as words.

The Cold War at Home
 How did the Cold War affect life in America? The Cold War cast a long shadow over American life in the late 1940s and early 1950s. Truman tried to carry on the New Deal reform tradition he had inherited from FDR, but the American people were more concerned about events abroad. The Republican Party used both growing dissatisfaction with postwar economic adjustment and fears of communist penetration of the United States to revive its sagging fortunes and regain control of the White House in 1952 for the first time in twenty years.

 Truman’s Troubles Matching his foreign policy successes with equal achievements at home was not easy for Harry S. Truman. As a loyal supporter of Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal programs during his Senate career, Truman had earned a reputation for being a hardworking, reliable, and intensely partisan legislator. But he was relatively unknown to the general public, and his background as a Missouri county official associated with Kansas City machine politics did little



The Cold War at Home


 to inspire confidence in his ability to lead the nation. Surprisingly well-read—especially in history and biography—Truman possessed sound judgment, the ability to reach decisions quickly, and a fierce and uncompromising sense of right and wrong. Two weaknesses marred his performance in the White House. One was a fondness for old friends, which resulted in the appointment of many Missouri and Senate cronies to high office. Men such as Attorney General Tom Clark, Secretary of the Treasury Charles Snyder, and White House military aide Harry Vaughn brought little credit to the Truman administration, while the loss of such effective public servants as Secretary of the Interior Harold Ickes and Labor Secretary Frances Perkins hurt it. The president’s other serious limitation was his lack of political vision. Failing to pursue a coherent legislative program of his own, he tried to perpetuate FDR’s New Deal and, as a result, engaged in a running battle with Congress. The postwar mood was not conducive to an extension of New Deal reforms. Americans were weary of shortages and sacrifices; they wanted the chance to buy the consumer goods denied them under wartime conditions. But in the rush to convert industry from producing planes and tanks to cars and appliances, problems soon emerged. Prices and wages rose quickly as Congress voted to end wartime controls. With prices going up 25 percent in two years, workers demanded higher wages to offset the loss of overtime pay. A wave of labor unrest swept over the country in the spring of 1946, culminating in two critical strikes: a walkout by coal miners that threatened to close down much of American industry and a paralyzing strike by railroad workers. President Truman was caught in the middle. Sensitive to union demands, he permitted businesses to negotiate large pay increases for their workers and then pass on the cost to consumers in the form of higher prices. He criticized Congress for weakening wartime price controls, but he failed to offer anything else to curb inflation. Homemakers blamed him for the rising price of food, while organized labor condemned Truman as the country’s “No. 1 Strikebreaker” when he asked Congress for power to draft striking railway workers into the army. In the face of this rising discontent, Truman’s efforts to extend the New Deal met with little success. Congress ignored his September 1945 call for measures to ensure economic security and enacted only the Employment Act of 1946. This legislation created the Council of Economic Advisers to assist the president and asserted the principle that the government was responsible for the state of the economy, but it failed to address Truman’s original goal of mandatory federal planning to achieve full employment. The Republicans took advantage of increasing public dissatisfaction with postwar economic woes to attack the Democrats. “To err is Truman,” the GOP proclaimed and then adopted a very effective two-word slogan for the 1946 congressional elections: “Had enough?” The American people, weary of inflation and labor unrest, responded by electing Republican majorities in both the House and Senate for the first time since 1930.

 overrode his veto of the Taft-Hartley Act in 1947. Designed to undo the prolabor tilt of the Wagner Act, the Taft-Hartley Act outlawed specific labor union activities—including the closed shop and secondary boycotts—and it permitted the president to invoke an eighty-day cooling-off period to delay strikes that might endanger national health or safety. Despite Truman’s claim that it was a “slave-labor” bill, unions were able to survive its provisions. President Truman’s political fortunes reached their lowest ebb in early 1948. Former Vice President Henry A. Wallace, claiming to represent the New Deal, announced his third-party (Progressive) candidacy in the presidential contest that year. Worried Democratic party leaders sought to persuade Truman to step aside and allow General Dwight D. Eisenhower to become the Democratic candidate. When Eisenhower turned down bids from both parties, the Democrats reluctantly nominated Truman. His prospects for victory in the fall, however, looked very dim—especially after disgruntled Southerners bolted from the Democratic party in protest over a progressive civil rights platform. The Dixiecrats, as they became known, nominated Strom Thurmond, the governor of South Carolina, on a States’ Rights party ticket. The defection of the Dixiecrats in the South and Wallace’s liberal followers in the North led political experts to predict an almost certain Republican victory. Governor Thomas E. Dewey of New York, the GOP candidate, was so sure of winning that he waged a cautious and bland campaign designed to give him a free hand once he was in the White House. With nothing to lose, Truman

Election of 1948
Electoral Vote by State


DEMOCRATIC
Harry S Truman 


24,105,695


REPUBLICAN
Thomas E. Dewey 


21,969,170


STATES' RIGHTS
Strom Thurmond 


1,169,021


MINOR PARTIES
Henry Wallace et al. 
 The president’s relations with Congress became even stormier after the 1946 elections. Truman successfully vetoed two GOP measures to give large tax cuts to the wealthy, but Congress

1,296,898


48,537,784




























































Truman Vindicated


Popular Vote




















 CHAPTER 28

THE ONSET OF THE COLD WAR

 barnstormed around the country denouncing the “do-nothing” Republican Eightieth Congress. The president’s “give-’em hell” tactics reminded voters of how much they owed the Democrats for helping them survive the Great Depression. To the amazement of the pollsters, Truman won a narrow but decisive victory in November. The old Roosevelt coalition—farmers, organized labor, urban ethnic groups, and blacks—had held together, enabling Truman to remain in the White House and the Democrats to regain control of Congress. There was one more reason for Truman’s win in 1948. During this election, held at the height of the Berlin crisis, the GOP failed to challenge Truman’s conduct of the Cold War. Locked in a tense rivalry with the Soviet Union, the American people saw no reason to reject a president who had countered aggression overseas with the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan. The Republicans, committed to support the bipartisan policy of containment, had allowed the Democrats to preempt the foreign policy issue. Until they found a way to challenge Truman’s Cold War policies, GOP leaders had little chance to regain the White House.

The Loyalty Issue


 program, ordering security checks of government employees in order to root out Communists. Originally intended to remove subversives for whom “reasonable grounds exist for belief that the person involved is disloyal,” within four years the Loyalty Review Board was dismissing workers as security risks if there was “reasonable doubt” of their loyalty. Thousands of government workers lost their jobs, charged with guilt by association with radicals or with membership in left-wing organizations. Often those who were charged had no chance to face their accusers. The most famous disclosure came in August 1948, when Whittaker Chambers, a repentant Communist, accused Alger Hiss of having been a Soviet spy in the 1930s. When Hiss, who had been a prominent State Department official, denied the charges, Chambers led investigators to a hollowed-out pumpkin on his Maryland farm. Inside the pumpkin were microfilms of confidential government documents. Chambers claimed that Hiss had passed the State Department materials to him in the late 1930s. Although the statute of limitations prevented a charge of treason against Hiss, he was convicted of perjury in January 1950 and sentenced to a five-year prison term. In 1948, the Justice Department further heightened fears of subversion. It charged eleven officials of the Communist Party with advocating the violent overthrow of the government. After a long trial, the jury found them guilty, and the party officials received prison sentences and heavy fines; in 1951, the Supreme Court upheld the convictions as constitutional. Such repressive measures failed, however, to reassure the nation. Events abroad intensified the sense of danger. The communist triumph in China in the fall of 1949 came as a shock; soon there were charges that “fellow travelers” in the State Department

 Despite Truman’s surprising victory in 1948, there was one area on which the Democrats were vulnerable. The fear of communism abroad that had led to the bipartisan containment policy could be used against them at home by politicians who were more willing to exploit the public’s deep-seated anxiety. Fear of radicalism had been a recurrent feature of American life since the early days of the republic. Federalists had tried to suppress dissent with the Alien and Sedition Acts in the 1790s; the KnowNothings had campaigned against foreigners and Catholics in the 1850s; and the Red Scare after World War I had been directed against both aliens and radicals. The Cold War heightened the traditional belief that subversion from abroad endangered the republic. Bold rhetoric from members of the Truman administration, portraying the men in the Kremlin as inspired revolutionaries bent on world conquest, frightened the American people. They viewed the Soviet Union as a successor to Nazi Germany—a totalitarian police state that threatened the basic liberties of a free people. A series of revelations of Communist espionage activities reinforced these fears, sparking a second Red Scare. Canadian officials uncovered a Soviet spy ring in 1946, and the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) held hearings indicating that Communist agents had flourished in the Agriculture and Treasury Departments in the 1930s. Although Truman tried to dismiss the loyalty issue as a “red herring,” he felt compelled to take protective measures, thus lending substance to the charges of subverA jubilant Harry Truman, on the morning after his 1948 election win, displays the headline blazoned sion. In March 1947, he initiated a loyalty on the front page of the Chicago Daily Tribune—a newspaper that believed the pollsters.

The Cold War at Home


Read the Document


Ronald Reagan, Testimony


 Before HUAC (1947)

 Alger Hiss, accused of being a Communist spy by Whittaker Chambers, takes an oath during his August 1948 hearings before the House Un-American Activities Committee. Hiss’s conviction on charges of perjury convinced many Americans that internal subversion threatened the nation’s survival.

 were responsible for “the loss of China.” In September 1949, when the Truman administration announced that the Russians had detonated their first atomic bomb, the end of America’s nuclear monopoly was blamed on Soviet espionage. In early 1950, Klaus Fuchs—a British scientist who had worked on the wartime Manhattan Project—admitted giving the Russians vital information about the A-bomb. A few months later, the government charged American Communists Ethel and Julius Rosenberg with conspiracy to transmit atomic secrets to the Soviet Union. In 1951, a jury found the Rosenbergs guilty of espionage, and Judge Irving Kaufman sentenced them to die for what he termed their “loathsome offense.” Despite their insistent claims of innocence and worldwide appeals on their behalf, the Rosenbergs were electrocuted on June 19, 1953. Thus by the early 1950s, nearly all the ingredients were at hand for a new outburst of hysteria—fear of Russia, evidence of espionage, and a belief in a vast unseen conspiracy. The only element missing was a leader to release the new outburst of intolerance.

 McCarthyism in Action On February 12, 1950, Senator Joseph R. McCarthy of Wisconsin delivered a routine Lincoln’s Birthday speech in Wheeling, West Virginia. This little known Republican suddenly attracted



 national attention when he declared, “I have here in my hand a list of 205—a list of names that were made known to the secretary of state as being members of the Communist Party and who nevertheless are still working and shaping policy in the State Department.” The charge that there were Communists in the State Department on different occasions with the number changed to 57, then 81—was never substantiated. But McCarthy’s Wheeling speech triggered a four-and-a-half-year crusade to hunt down alleged Communists in government. The stridency and sensationalism of the senator’s accusations soon won the name McCarthyism. McCarthy’s basic technique was the multiple untruth. He leveled a bevy of charges of treasonable activities in government. While officials were refuting his initial accusations, he brought forth a steady stream of new ones, so the corrections never caught up with the latest blast. He failed to unearth a single confirmed Communist in government, but he kept the Truman administration in turmoil. Drawing on an army of informers, primarily disgruntled federal workers with grievances against their colleagues and superiors, McCarthy charged government agencies with harboring and protecting Communist agents and accused the State Department of deliberately losing the Cold War. His briefcase bulged with documents, but he did very little actual research, relying instead on reports (often outdated) from earlier congressional investigations. He exploited the press with great skill, combining current accusations with promises of future disclosures to guarantee headlines. The secret of McCarthy’s power was the fear he engendered among his Senate colleagues. In 1950, Maryland Senator Millard Tydings, who headed a committee critical of McCarthy’s activities, failed to win reelection when McCarthy opposed him; after that, other senators ran scared. McCarthy delighted in making sweeping, startling charges of Communist sympathies against prominent public figures. A favorite target was patrician Secretary of State Dean Acheson, whom McCarthy ridiculed as the “Red Dean,” with his “cane, spats, and tea-sipping little finger”; he even went after General George Marshall, claiming that the wartime army chief of staff was an agent of the Communist conspiracy. Nor were fellow Republicans immune. One GOP senator was described as “a living miracle in that he is without question the only man who has lived so long with neither brains nor guts.” The attacks on the wealthy, famous, and privileged won McCarthy a devoted national following, though at the height of his influence in early 1954, he gained the approval of only 50 percent of the respondents in a Gallup poll. McCarthy drew a disproportionate backing from working-class Catholics and ethnic groups, especially the Irish, Poles, and Italians, who normally voted Democratic. He offered a simple solution to the complicated Cold War: Defeat the enemy at home rather than continue to engage in costly foreign aid programs and entangling alliances abroad. Above all, McCarthy appealed to conservative Republicans in the Midwest who shared his right-wing views and felt cheated by Truman’s upset victory in 1948. Even GOP leaders who viewed McCarthy’s tactics with distaste, such as Robert A. Taft of Ohio, quietly encouraged him to attack the vulnerable Democrats.



 CHAPTER 28

THE ONSET OF THE COLD WAR

Watch the Video


 McCarthyism and the Politics of Fear

 In the early 1950s, U.S. Senator Joseph McCarthy, a Republican politician from Wisconsin, made a stream of sensational, unsubstantiated, and damaging accusations about alleged communists working in the State Department and other U.S. government agencies and institutions. Sen. McCarthy’s prominence suffered a fatal downfall when he maliciously attacked top officials and others in the U.S. Army in 1954, and he was subsequently censured by his colleagues in the U.S. Senate

The Republicans in Power
 In 1952, the GOP capitalized on a growing sense of national frustration to capture the presidency. The stalemate in Korea and the second Red Scare created a desire for political change; revelations of scandals by several individuals close to Truman intensified the feeling that someone needed to clean up “the mess in Washington.” In Dwight D. Eisenhower, the Republican Party found the perfect candidate to explore what one senator called K1C2—Korea, Communism, and corruption. Immensely popular because of his amiable manner, winning smile, and heroic stature, Eisenhower alone appeared to have the ability to unite a divided nation. In the 1952 campaign, Ike displayed hidden gifts as a politician in running against Adlai Stevenson, the eloquent Illinois governor whose appeal was limited to diehard Democrats and liberal intellectuals. Eisenhower allowed his young running mate, Senator Richard M. Nixon of California, to hammer away at the Democrats on

 the Communist and corruption issues, but he himself delivered the most telling blow of all on the Korean War. Speaking in Detroit in late October, just after the fighting had intensified again in Korea, Ike promised if elected he would go personally to the battlefield in an attempt “to bring the Korean War to an early and honorable end.”

THE ELECTION OF 1952
Candidate Eisenhower Stevenson 
Party
Republican
Democratic


Popular
Vote
33,778,963
27,314,992


Electoral
Vote


 “That does it—Ike is in,” several reporters exclaimed after they heard this pledge. The hero of World War II had clinched his election by committing himself to end an unpopular war. Ten days later,

The Cold War at Home


Watch the Video




Ike for President: Campaign Ad (1952)


 In the 1952 presidential campaign, Republican presidential candidate Dwight D. Eisenhower was the first presidential candidate to make effective use of television “spot,” advertising. Eisenhower’s televised ads help defeat his Democratic opponent, Adlai Stevenson, in the 1952 election.

 he won the presidency handily, carrying thirty-nine states, including four in the formerly solid Democratic South. The Republican party, however, did not fare as well in Congress; it gained just a slight edge in the House and controlled the Senate by only one seat. Once elected, Eisenhower moved quickly to fulfill his campaign pledge. He spent three days in early December touring the battlefront in Korea, quickly ruling out the new offensive the military favored. “Small attacks on small hills,” he later wrote, “would not end the war.” Instead he turned to diplomacy, relying on subtle hints to China on the possible use of nuclear weapons to break the stalemated peace talks. These tactics, together with the death of Joseph Stalin in early March, finally led to the signing of an armistice on July 27, 1953, which ended the fighting but left Korea divided—as it had been before the war—near the 38th parallel. The new president was less effective in dealing with the problem raised by Senator McCarthy’s continuing witch-hunt. Instead of toning down his antiCommunist crusade after the Republican victory in 1952, McCarthy used his new position as chairman of the Senate Committee on Government Operations as a base for

 ferreting out Communists on the federal payroll. He made a series of charges against the foreign affairs agencies and demanded that certain books be purged from American information libraries overseas. Eisenhower’s advisers urged the president to use his own great prestige to stop McCarthy. But Ike refused such a confrontation, saying, “I will not get into a pissing contest with a skunk.” Eisenhower preferred to play for time, hoping the American people would eventually come to their senses. The Wisconsin senator finally overreached himself. In early 1954, he uncovered an army dentist suspected of disloyalty and proceeded to attack the upper echelons of the U.S. Army, telling one much decorated general that he was “not fit to wear the uniform.” The controversy culminated in the televised Army– McCarthy hearings. For six weeks, the senator revealed his crude, bullying behavior to the American people. Viewers were repelled by his frequent outbursts that began with the insistent cry, “Point of order, Mr. Chairman, point of order,” and by his attempt to slur the reputation of a young lawyer associated with army counsel Joseph Welch. This last maneuver led Welch to condemn McCarthy for



 CHAPTER 28

THE ONSET OF THE COLD WAR

 his “reckless cruelty” and ask rhetorically, as millions watched on television, “Have you no sense of decency, sir?” Courageous Republicans, led by Senators Ralph Flanders of Vermont and Margaret Chase Smith of Maine, joined with Democrats to bring about the Senate’s censure of McCarthy in December 1954, by a vote of sixty-seven to twenty-two. Once rebuked, McCarthy fell quickly from prominence. He died three years later virtually unnoticed and unmourned. Yet his influence was profound. Not only did he paralyze national life with what a Senate subcommittee described as “the most nefarious campaign of half-truth and untruth in the history of the Republic,” but he also helped impose a political and cultural conformity that froze dissent for the rest of the 1950s. Long after McCarthy’s passing, the nation tolerated loyalty oaths for teachers, the banning of left-wing books in public libraries, and the blacklisting of entertainers in radio, television, and films. Freedom of expression was inhibited, and the opportunity to try out new ideas and approaches was lost as the United States settled into a sterile Cold War consensus. While Dwight Eisenhower could claim that his policy of giving McCarthy enough rope to hang himself had worked, it is possible that a bolder and more forthright presidential attack on the senator might have spared the nation some of the excesses of the second Red Scare.

 he would settle for a relaxation of tensions with the Soviet Union. In part, he was motivated by a deeply held concern about the budget. Defense spending had increased from $13 billion to $50 billion under Truman; Ike was convinced the nation was in danger of going bankrupt unless military spending was reduced. As president, he inaugurated a “new look” for American defense, cutting back on the army and navy and relying even more heavily than Truman had on the air force and its nuclear striking power. As a result, the defense budget dropped below $40 billion annually. In 1954, Dulles announced reliance on massive retaliation—in fact a continuance of Truman’s policy of deterrence. Rather than becoming involved in limited wars such as Korea, the United States would consider the possibility of using nuclear weapons to halt any Communist aggression that threatened vital U.S. interests anywhere in the world. While he permitted Dulles to make his veiled nuclear threats, Eisenhower’s fondest dream was to end the arms race. Sobered by the development of the hydrogen bomb, successfully tested by the United States in November 1952 and by the Soviet Union in August 1953, the president began a new effort at disarmament with the Russians. Yet before this initiative could take effect, Ike had to weather a series of crises around the world that tested his skill and patience to the utmost.

Entanglement in Indochina


Eisenhower Wages the Cold War
 How successful was Eisenhower at dealing with the foreign policy issues facing the United States? Dwight D. Eisenhower came into the presidency in 1952 unusually well prepared to lead the nation at the height of the Cold War. His long years of military service had exposed him to a wide variety of international issues, both in Asia and in Europe, and to an even broader array of world leaders, such as Winston Churchill and Charles de Gaulle. He was not only an experienced military strategist but a gifted politician and diplomat as well. He was blessed with a sharp, pragmatic mind and organizational genius that enabled him to plan and carry out large enterprises, grasping the precise relationship between the parts and the whole. Above all, he had a serene confidence in his own ability. At the end of his first day in the White House, he confided in his diary: “Plenty of worries and difficult problems. But such has been my portion for a long time—the result is that this just seems like a continuation of all I’ve been doing since July 1941.” Eisenhower chose John Foster Dulles as his secretary of state. The myth soon developed that Ike had given Dulles free rein to conduct American diplomacy. Appearances were deceptive. Eisenhower preferred to work behind the scenes. He let Dulles make the public speeches and appearances before congressional committees, where the secretary’s hard-line views placated GOP extremists. But Dulles carefully consulted with the president before every appearance, meeting frequently with Eisenhower at the White House and telephoning him several times a day. Ike respected his secretary of state’s broad knowledge of foreign policy and skill in conducting American diplomacy, but he made all the major decisions himself. “There’s only one man I know who has seen more of the world and talked with more people and knows more than he does,” Ike said of Dulles, “and that’s me.” From the outset, Eisenhower was determined to bring the Cold War under control. Ideally, he wanted to end it, but as a realist,

 The first crisis facing the new president came in Indochina. Since 1950, the United States had been giving France military and economic aid in a war in Indochina against Communist guerrillas led by Ho Chi Minh. The Chinese increased their support to Ho’s forces, known as the Vietminh, after the Korean War ended; by the spring of 1954, the French were on the brink of defeat. The Vietminh had surrounded nearly ten thousand French troops at Dien Bien Phu deep in the interior of northern Indochina; in desperation, France turned to the United States for help. Admiral Arthur Radford, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, proposed an American air strike to lift the siege. Although the other Joint Chiefs had strong objections to involving American forces in another Asian war so soon after Korea, hawkish Republican senators were clamoring for action. Eisenhower decided against Radford’s bold proposal, but he killed it in his typically indirect fashion. Fearful that an air attack would lead inevitably to the use of ground troops, Ike insisted that both Congress and American allies in Europe approve the strike in advance. Congressional leaders, recalling the recent Korean stalemate, were reluctant to agree; the British were appalled and ruled out any joint action. The president used these objections to reject intervention in Indochina in 1954. Years later, he stated his reasons more candidly. “The jungles of Indochina would have swallowed up division after division of United States troops,” he explained. Equally important, he believed that U.S. involvement in France’s war would have compromised the American “tradition of anticolonialism.” Dien Bien Phu fell to the Vietminh in May 1954. At an international conference held in Geneva a few weeks later, Indochina was divided at the 17th parallel. Ho gained control of North Vietnam, while the French continued to rule in the South, with provision for a general election within two years to unify the country. The election was never held, largely because Eisenhower feared it would result in an overwhelming mandate for Ho. Instead, the United States gradually took over from the French in South Vietnam, sponsoring a new government in Saigon headed by Ngo Dinh Diem, a Vietnamese

Eisenhower Wages the Cold War


Read the Document




Dwight D. Eisenhower, Letters on Dien Bien Phu (1954)


A
French soldier stands guard over a truckload of Vietnamese nationalists captured in the fighting in Indochina. French efforts to quash the rebellion in Vietnam ended on May 7, 1954, when the Vietminh took the French stronghold at Dien Bien Phu. 
 nationalist from a northern Catholic family. While Eisenhower can be given credit for refusing to engage American forces on behalf of French colonialism in Indochina, his determination to resist communist expansion had committed the United States to a long and eventually futile struggle to prevent Ho Chi Minh from achieving his long-sought goal of a unified, independent Vietnam.

Containing China
 The Communist government in Beijing posed a serious challenge for the Eisenhower administration. Senate Republicans, led by William Knowland of California, blamed the Democrats for the “loss” of China. They viewed Mao as a puppet of the Soviet Union and insisted the United States recognize the Nationalists on Formosa as the only legitimate government of China. While State Department experts realized there were underlying tensions between China and Russia, Mao’s intervention in the Korean War had convinced most Americans that the Chinese Communists

 were an integral part of a larger Communist effort at world domination. Thus, Truman and Acheson had abandoned any hope of trying to exploit differences between Mao and Stalin by wooing China away from the Soviet Union. Eisenhower and Dulles chose to accentuate the potential conflict between Russia and China. By taking a strong line against China, the United States could make the Chinese realize that Russia was unable to protect their interests; at the same time, such a hawkish policy would please congressional conservatives such as Knowland. Ultimately, Eisenhower and Dulles hoped that a policy of firmness would not only contain communist Chinese expansion in Asia but also drive a wedge between Moscow and Beijing. A crisis in the Formosa Straits provided the first test of the new policy. In the fall of 1954, communist China threatened to seize coastal islands, notably Quemoy and Matsu, occupied by the Nationalists. Fearful that seizure of these offshore islands would be the first step toward an invasion of Formosa, Eisenhower permitted Dulles to sign a security treaty with Chiang Kai-shek committing

 Complete the Assignment America Enters the Middle East on myhistorylab

Feature
Essay


H


 arry Truman never liked disagreeing with George Marshall. The secretary of state was, in Truman’s view, the “greatest living American,” and, as the architect of the American victory in World War II, Marshall possessed a stature no civilian—and certainly no accidental president, such as Truman remained in the spring of 1948—could hope to match. Marshall adamantly opposed an action recommended by several of Truman’s closest advisers. The British government had decided to relinquish control of Palestine, the region on the eastern shore of the Mediterranean it had inherited from the Ottoman empire after World War I. The United Nations General Assembly in November 1947 proposed partitioning Palestine into two states, one controlled by the Arab inhabitants of the region, the other controlled by the Jewish inhabitants. The UN plan provoked violence between the Arabs and Jews, with each group struggling to position itself most favorably for the moment the British left. The U.S. State Department advocated a cautious policy in the evolving situation. Robert Lovett, the American undersecretary of state, told Truman that hasty recognition of the new Jewish state, Israel, would constitute “buying a pig in a poke”—that the United States didn’t know what kind of government Israel would have, what the boundaries of the new Jewish state would be, or how Israel’s neighbors would respond to the creation of this novel entity. George Marshall was even more adamant than Lovett. Marshall knew that Truman was being told by his political advisers that recognition of Israel

America Enters the
Middle East
 would help him and the Democrats in the upcoming 1948 elections, but the secretary of state thoroughly rejected the idea that politics should influence such a crucial foreign policy decision. “These considerations have nothing to do with the issue,” Marshall told the president. “I don’t think politics should play any part in this.” Clark Clifford was the adviser who made the strongest case for early recognition, and Marshall resented that Clifford was even present at the meetings regarding Israel. The secretary of state told Truman in the bluntest of terms, “If you follow Clifford’s advice and if I were to vote in the election, I would vote against you.” “Well, that was rough as a cob,” Truman remarked after Marshall left the Oval Office. “I never saw the general so furious.” But Truman had reasons for going ahead with recognition, and politics was only one. The Cold War was under way, and Truman feared that the Soviet Union would recognize Israel before the United States did, giving Moscow a potential advantage in the Middle East at a time when that oil-rich region was becoming critical in the balance of international power. Moreover, the Jewish people had been promised a homeland by the British many years before, and Israel was the manifestation of that promise. To be sure, Britain’s promises didn’t bind the United States, but Britain was America’s ally, and Truman felt a certain obligation to follow through on Britain’s behalf. Finally, the Jews had suffered horribly during World War II, and although a Jewish state wouldn’t bring back the six million slaughtered in the Holocaust, it would provide the Jews of the world a refuge against future threats. Truman gave Marshall time to cool off, confident that the general’s military training would incline him to

 support—or at least not oppose—his commander in chief once the president made up his mind. And when Truman did choose in favor of early recognition of Israel, Marshall gritted his teeth but indeed held his tongue. On May 14, 1948, fifteen minutes after the official proclamation of the Jewish state of Israel, the United States announced its recognition. This first American step into the Middle East was followed by others. In 1951, the populist prime minister of Iran, Mohammad Mossadeq, announced a plan to nationalize the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, a giant firm that held exclusive rights to develop and exploit Iran’s richest oil fields. The British government was the principal shareholder in Anglo-Iranian, and the company’s identity and presence reminded Iranians of the power Britain had long wielded over their country. Mossadeq’s nationalization plan was intended to break Britain’s hold forever. The British government, not surprisingly, resisted the nationalization effort. The British approached the Truman administration about joining in a secret operation to overthrow Mossadeq. Truman had consented to the 1947 establishment of the Central Intelligence Agency, but he never lost his fear that the spy agency would become an “American Gestapo,” as he called it, and he rejected the British overture. But after Dwight Eisenhower succeeded Truman in the White House, the British reproposed their plan. They argued that Mossadeq was either a Communist in disguise or the dupe of Communists, and that if he remained in power Iran and its oil would slip into the grasp of the neighboring Soviet Union. Eisenhower took this possibility very seriously. He couldn’t know that

 things would happen the way the British predicted, but neither could he know that they would not happen that way. At a moment when the Cold War was spreading beyond Europe and becoming a global contest, Eisenhower didn’t want to risk letting the Soviets seize Iran. Accordingly, he approved a joint British–American plan against Mossadeq. Operation Ajax, as it was labeled, called for the constitutional monarch of Iran, the Shah, to demand Mossadeq’s resignation. If Mossadeq resisted, as he was expected to do, the CIA and its British counterpart would mobilize mobs in Tehran to force the prime minister from office. A pro-Shah general would send tanks into the streets and complete the coup. The plan went off with only minor glitches, and the pro-American Shah assumed power. The Eisenhower administration brokered an agreement between the Iranian government and the British over the fate of the AngloIranian Oil Company—an agreement that awarded American companies a share of Iranian production. To keep the Shah in power, the United States sent large amounts of economic and military aid to Tehran. The American aid helped the Shah suppress dissent in Iran but made him increasingly unpopular with the masses of the Iranian people—who over time transferred that animosity to the United States. Washington won back a bit of credibility with the peoples of the Middle East three years later. The British government had a new enemy: Gamal Abdel Nasser, an Egyptian colonel who seized power in Cairo and nationalized the Suez Canal Company, another vestige of Britain’s declining empire. The British talked France and Israel, who had their own reasons for disliking Nasser, into a tripartite operation to overthrow the Egyptian leader. In October 1956 the three countries attacked Egypt near the Suez Canal, hoping the military pressure would result in Nasser’s downfall. Eisenhower refused to back them. The president distrusted Nasser, but

 President Harry Truman (left) listened to Secretary of State George Marshall (right) on most matters of foreign policy, but charted his own course regarding Israel.

 he didn’t think the Egyptian leader’s actions warranted a Middle Eastern war. He told the British—the ringleaders of the Suez operation, in Eisenhower’s accurate assessment— that they must shut down the nascent war at once. When they hesitated, he threatened to use America’s trump cards against the British: oil and the dollar. The president prepared to block oil shipments from the Americas to Britain, and to let the British currency, the pound, decline against the dollar. A loss of American oil would squeeze British industry and transport; a collapse of the pound would ravage British finance. The British had no choice but to acquiesce in Eisenhower’s ultimatum. The Suez war halted almost as soon as it began, causing much soul-searching in Britain, where the fiasco symbolized the end of Britain’s pretensions to great-power status. The American role in the war’s end momentarily belied the prevalent impression in the Middle East that Washington would always stand with the European imperialists and the Zionists—the label applied to the Israelis by the Arabs—in a crisis.

 Yet the good feeling faded before long, and it only underscored the larger reality: that by the end of 1956 the United States had become the most important outside power in the Middle East. How America would play its new role remained to be seen, but henceforward nothing of substance would occur in the Middle East without requiring a significant response from the United States.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 1.
Why did Truman decide to recognize Israel in 1948? 2. Why did Eisenhower side with the British in Iran but against them when they invaded Egypt together with the French and Israelis during the Suez Crisis in 1956? 




 CHAPTER 28

THE ONSET OF THE COLD WAR

 the United States to defend Formosa. When the Communists began shelling the offshore islands, Eisenhower persuaded Congress to pass a resolution authorizing him to use force to defend Formosa and “closely related localities.” Despite repeated requests, however, the president refused to say whether he would use force to repel a Chinese attack on Quemoy or Matsu. Instead, he and Dulles hinted at the use of nuclear weapons, carefully stating that their action would depend on whether they considered an attack on the offshore islands part of a larger offensive aimed at Formosa. The Chinese leaders, unsure whether Eisenhower was bluffing, decided not to test American resolve. The shelling ended in 1955, and when the Communists resumed it again in 1958, another firm but equally ambiguous American response forced them to desist. The apparent refusal of the Soviet Union to come to China’s aid in these crises with the United States contributed to a growing rift between the two communist nations by the end of the 1950s. Unfortunately, the Eisenhower administration failed to take full advantage of the opportunity that it had helped to create.

Covert Actions
 Amid these dangerous crises, the Eisenhower administration worked behind the scenes in the 1950s to expand the nation’s global influence. In 1953, the CIA was instrumental in overthrowing a popularly elected government in Iran and placing the shah in full control of that country. (See the Feature Essay: “America Enters the Middle East,” pp. 682–683.) Closer to home, in Latin America, Eisenhower once again relied on covert action. In 1954, the CIA masterminded the overthrow of a leftist regime in Guatemala. The immediate advantage was in denying the Soviets a possible foothold in the Western Hemisphere, but Latin Americans resented the thinly disguised interference of the United States in their internal affairs. More important, when Fidel Castro came to power in Cuba in 1959, the Eisenhower administration—after a brief effort at conciliation—adopted a hard line that helped drive Cuba into the Soviet orbit and led to new attempts at covert action. Eisenhower’s record as a cold warrior was thus mixed. His successful ending of the Korean War and his peacekeeping efforts in Indochina and Formosa and in the Suez crisis are all to his credit. Yet his reliance on coups and subversion directed by the CIA in Iran and Guatemala reveal Ike’s corrupting belief that the ends justified the means. And despite the 1952 campaign call for the liberation of eastern Europe, Eisenhower accepted Soviet domination of this region, refusing to act on behalf of East German protesters in 1953 or Hungarian freedom fighters in 1956. Nevertheless, Eisenhower did display an admirable ability to stay calm and unruffled in moments of great tension, reassuring the nation and the world. And above all, he could boast, as he did in 1962, of his ability to keep the peace. “In those eight years,” he reminded the nation, “we lost no inch of ground to tyranny. One war was ended and incipient wars were blocked.”

Waging Peace
 Eisenhower hoped to ease Cold War tensions by ending the nuclear arms race. The advent of the hydrogen bomb intensified his concern over nuclear warfare; by 1955, both the

