CHAPTER 14
Lesson 1
Truman and Eisenhower
Lesson 2
The Affluent Society
Lesson 3
The Other Side of American Life
The Story Matters...
The 1950s was a time of tremendous change in America. New advances in technology planted the seeds of today's computerized world, and developments in medicine saved thousands of lives. A population explosion called the baby boom produced a generation that would change the world. Americans— young and old—also experienced a new genre of music called rock nroll.
◄ Elvis Presley, born poor in Mississippi, rose to fame in the 1950s and became widely known as the "King of Rock 'n' Roll."
PHOTO:
Sunset Boulevard/H istorical/CORBIS 427
CHAPTER 14
Place andTime: Postwar America 1945-1960
After World War II, the United States experienced years of strong economic growth, as well as advances in science, technology, medicine, and transportation. Although the prosperity did not reach everyone, the economic boom meant most Americans enjoyed more prosperity than earlier generations, and a new consumer culture emerged.
I
■ The Interstate Highway System
Step Into the Place
Look at the information presented on the map to identify where most of the interstate highways were built. £2917B, 29H, 31b
DBQ
Analyzing Historical Documents The creation ofthe interstate highway system had a tremendous impact on the nation's economy. What were its main effects?
Ji	
cjj	CIS
Road Culture Interstate travel encouraged the development of hotels, stores, and restaurants near interstate exits.
o	^400 km \	'
Lambert Azimuthal Equa&Arq^rojection . •; . ;,•* |
PHOTOS: left page (t)Marvin Koner/Historical Premium/CORBIS, (b)detail/White House Collection/The White House Historical Association; right page (t)Ralph Morse/Time Life Pictures/Getty Images, (c) J. R. Eyerman/Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images, (b) detail/White House Collection/The White House Historical Association
Step Into the Time
Predicting Consequences
1944 GIBill gives financial aid to veterans
Predicting Consequences
Choose an event from the time line and write a paragraph
Truman
1945-1953
1946 ENIAC becomes the first electronic computer
1950 David R' publishes M
★	State capital
•	Top ten city (population, 1950)
---Interstate highway |
ncord ioston
to vide nee tford
York City •enton hflladelphia “ »ver polis
gton, D.C.

I
Love Lucy ebuts on television Eisenhower
1953-1961 1955 Salk polio vaccine becomes widely available
Commercial Trucking Interstate highways made distribution of goods by transport trucks fast and efficient.
Rise of Suburbs Interstate highways contributed to the growth ofsuburbs and urban sprawl.
1956 Congress passes 1958 John Kenneth Galbraith Federal Highway Act publishes The Affluent Society
1959 Lorraine Hansberry's A Raisin in the Sun opens on Broadway
does prosperity change the way
It Matters Because
Academic Vocabulary
• legislator • abandon
In the postwar era, Congress limited the power of union and rejected most of President Truman's plan for a "Fait Deal." When Eisenhower became president, he cut back some government programs but approved billions of dollars for the expansion of the interstate highway systi

Content Vocabulary
•	closed shop
•	right-to-work laws
•	union shop
•	dynamic conservatism
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read, complete a graphic organizer like this one by listing characteristics of the postwar economy.
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 9F describe presidential actions and congressional votes to address minority rights in the United States, including desegregation of the armed forces, the Civil Rights acts of 1957 and 1964, and the Voting Rights Act of 1965
continued on the next page
Return to a Peacetime Economy
guidingquestion What happened when the nation returned to a peacetime economy, a how did government try to ease the transition?
After the war, many Americans feared the return to a peacetime economy. They worried about unemployment and a recession because military production had stopped and millions of former soldiers needed work. Despite such worries, the economy contin to grow after the war. Increased consumer spending helped ward a recession. After so many years of economic depression and wartime shortages, Americans rushed out to buy consumer gooc
The Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944, popularly callee the GI Bill, also boosted the economy. The act provided funds tc help veterans establish businesses, buy homes, and attend colleg< The postwar economy did have problems in the early years afte the war. A greater demand for goods led to higher prices. The resulting inflation soon triggered labor unrest. As the cost of liv rose, workers in the automobile, steel, electrical, and mining industries went on strike for better pay.
Truman was afraid that the miners’ strikes would drastically reduce the nation’s energy supply. He ordered the government t< take control of the mines. He also pressured mine owners to gra the union most of its demands. Truman even stopped a strike tl shut down the nation’s railroads by threatening to draft the stril workers into the army.
Labor unrest and high prices prompted many Americans t call for a change. The Republicans seized on these feelings durir
430
the 1946 congressional elections, and won control of both houses of Congress for the first time since 1930.
The new conservative Congress quickly set out to limit the power of organized labor. In 1947 legislators passed the Taft-Hartley Act, which outlawed the closed shop, or the practice of forcing business owners to hire only union members. This law also allowed states to pass right-to-work laws, which outlawed union shops (shops requiring new workers to join the union). It prohibited featherbedding, or limiting work output in order to create more jobs. It also banned using union money to support political campaigns. Truman, however, vetoed the bill, arguing that it was a mistake:
PRIMARYSOURCE
M [It would] reverse the basic direction of our national labor policy, inject the Government into private economic affairs on an unprecedented scale, and conflict with important principles of our democratic society. Its provisions would cause more strikes, not fewer. **
—from a message to the U.S. House of Representatives, June 20,1947
Despite President Truman’s concerns, Congress passed the Taft-Hartley Act in 1947 over his veto. Supporters of the act claimed that the law held irresponsible unions in check. Labor leaders, however, called the act a “slave labor” law, insisting that it erased many of the gains that unions had made since 1933.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining How did the Gl Bill help the nation transition from a wartime economy to a peacetime economy?
Truman's Program
guiding question How did the Truman administration seek to continue New Deal goals?
(continued from p. 430)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 17B identify the causes of prosperity in the 1950s, including the Baby Boom and the impact ofthe Gl Bill (Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944), and the effects of prosperity in the 1950s such as increased consumption and the growth of agriculture and business
17C describe the economic impact of defense spending on the business cycle and education priorities from 1945 to the 1990s
21B discuss historical reasons why the constitution has been amended
legislator one who makes laws as a member of a legislative body fora political unit
closed shop an agreement in which a company agrees to hire only union members
right-to-work law a law
making it illegal to require employees to join a union
union shop a business that requires employees to join a union
The Democratic Party’s loss of control in Congress in the 1946 elections did not dampen President Truman’s plans. After taking office, Truman had proposed domestic measures to continue the work of Franklin Roosevelts New Deal. He worked to push this agenda through Congress.
Truman's Legislative Agenda
Truman’s proposals included expanding Social Security benefits and raising the minimum wage. He also proposed public housing and slum clearance, a program to ensure full employment through federal spending and investment, a system of national health insurance, and long-range environmental and public works planning.
In February 1948, Truman also boldly asked Congress to pass a broad civil rights bill.
The bill would protect African Americans right to vote. It would also abolish poll taxes and make lynching a federal crime. He issued an executive order barring discrimination in federal employment and ending segregation in the armed forces. Most of Trumans legislative efforts failed as a coalition of Republicans and conservative Southern Democrats defeated many of his proposals.
The Gl Bill provided funds for veterans to attend college after the war.
By 1947, nearly half of all those attending college were veterans.
CRITICALTHINKING
Making Inferences Why were so many college students veterans in 1947? victory.
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
In which state did one elector not vote with the rest of the state's electors? ELECTORAL VOTE TOTAL:
POPULAR VOTE TOTAL:
48,793,826 2.41%
1,176,125
45.07%
21,991,291
■■ Truman (Democrat) ■■ Dewey (Republican)
Thurmond (States'Right! ■■ Other
Mixed
* Eleven electors in Tennessee votei Truman and one voted forThurmom
The Election of 1948
PLACES AND REGIONS
In which region did Thurmond enjoy the most electoral support?
abandon to withdraw protection, support, or help
Harry Truman gleefully shows the incorrect headline declaring his election defeat.
CRITICALTHINKING
Identifying Central Ideas What made Truman's victory such a surprise?
As the 1948 presidential election approached, most observers gave Trun little chance of winning. Some viewed his administration as inept.
In addition, fractures in the Democratic Party seemed to doom his campaign. Two groups abandoned the party at that summers conventh A group of Southern Democrats, angry at Truman’s support of civil righ formed the States’ Rights, or Dixiecrat, Party. They nominated South Carolina governor Strom Thurmond for president. Liberal Democrats v were frustrated by Truman’s ineffective domestic policies and critical of anti-Soviet foreign policy formed a new Progressive Party. Henry A. Wallace was their presidential candidate. Besides these two new challengers, Truman faced his Republican opponent, New York governc Thomas Dewey. Dignified and popular, Dewey seemed unbeatable.
Truman remained confident of reelection, however. He traveled more than 20,000 miles by train and made more than 200 speeches. He attack the majority Republican Congi
■ ;........................................................
as “do-nothing, good-for-noth for refusing to enact his legisla agenda. However, his attacks w not entirely accurate. The “Do Nothing Congress” had passed aid program to Greece and Tui and the Marshall Plan. Congre had passed the law that create* the Department of Defense, th National Security Council, an* CIA. It had permanently estab the Joint Chiefs of Staff and se the air force as an independen branch of the military. It also 1 passed the Twenty-second Amendment, which limited a
E, „ 'ff , a" BU' bKiUSe	”eaS
that d,d not affect most Americans directly, Trumans charges began to stick.
Supported by laborers, African Americans, and farmers, Truman won a narrow but stunning victory over Dewey. In addition, the Democratic Party regained control of both houses of Congress.
The Fair Deal
— Analyzing-----
Primary Sources
Truman’s Fair Deal
Truman’s 1949 State of the Union address repeated his previous domestic agenda. Every segment of our population and every individual,” he declared, has a right to expect from our Government a fair deal.” Whether intentional or not, the president had coined a name—the Fair Deal—to set his program apart from the New Deal.
The 81st Congress did not completely support Truman’s Fair Deal. Legislators did raise the legal minimum wage to 75<t an hour. They increased Social Security benefits by over 75 percent and extended them to 10 million additional people. Congress also passed the National Housing Act of 1949, which provided for the construction of low-income housing and for long-term rent subsidies. Congress refused, however, to pass national health insurance or to provide aid for farmers or schools. Led by conservative Republicans and Dixiecrats, legislators also opposed Truman’s civil rights legislation.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Making Connections What components of the New Deal did Truman adopt as part of his legislative agenda?
The Eisenhower Years
guidingquestion How did Eisenhower's presidency signal a more conservative direction for the government?
In 1950 the United States went to war in Korea. The war consumed the nation’s attention and resources, ending Truman’s Fair Deal. By 1952, with the war at a bloody stalemate and his approval rating dropping quickly, Truman decided not to run again.
With no Democratic incumbent to face, Republicans pinned their hopes on a popular World War II hero: Dwight Eisenhower, former commander of the Allied Forces in Europe. The Democrats nominated Illinois governor Adlai Stevenson.
The Republicans adopted the slogan “It’s time for a change!” The warm and friendly Eisenhower, known as “Ike,” promised to end the war in Korea. “I like Ike” became the Republican rallying cry. Eisenhower won the election in a landslide. The Republicans also gained an eight-seat majority in the House, while the Senate became evenly divided between Democrats and Republicans.
Eisenhower and "Dynamic Conservatism"
President Eisenhower had two favorite phrases. Middle of the road described his political beliefs, and "dynamic conservatism meant balancing economic conservatism with activism that would benefit the country. Under the guidance of a cabinet filled with business leaders, Eisenhower ended government price and rent controls. Many conservatives viewed these as unnecessary federal regulations of the economy. Eisenhowers administration believed business growth was vital to the nation. His secretary of defense, the former president of General Motors, declared that “what is good for our country is good for General Motors, and vice versa.
As we look around the country, many of our shortcomings stand out.... Our minimum wages are far too low.... Our farmers still face an uncertain future. And too many of them lack the benefits of our modern civilization. Some of our natural resources are still being wasted. We are acutely short of electric power.... Five million families are still living in slums and firetraps.... Proper medical care is so expensive that it is out of the reach of the great majority of our citizens. Our schools ... are utterly inadequate. Our democratic ideals are often thwarted by prejudice and intolerance.... [E]very individual has a right to expect from our Government a fair deal.^^
—from his State of the Union address, January 5,1949
DBQ
ANALYZING
Why did Truman believe that reforms were needed?
dynamic conservatism
a policy of balancing economic conservatism with some activism in other areas
Postwar America 433
The expansion of the federal highway system eased commuter traffic.
CRITICALTHINKING
Analyzing Information How did the construction of the interstate highway system demonstrate Eisenhower's dynamic conservatism?
To cut federal spending, Eisenhower vetoed a school construction bill and agreed to slash aid to public housing. H also targeted aid to businesses, or what he called “creeping socialism.” Shortly after taking office, he abolished the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC), which loaned money to banks, railroads, and other large institutions in financial trouble. Another agency, the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), also came under Eisenhower’s scrutiny. During his presidency, federal spending for the TVA fell fro $185 million to $12 million. Eisenhower also supported soim modest tax cuts.
In some areas, Eisenhower took an activist role. He especial
pushed for two large government projects. As more Americans ov cars, the need for better roads increased. In 1956 Congress passed tl Federal Highway Act, the largest public works program in American history. The act provided for a $25 billion, 10-year project to build more than 40,000 miles (64,400 km) of interstate highways. Congress also authorized the construction of the St. Lawrence Seaway. This project included building a series of locks along the St. Lawrence River that wor allow ships to travel from the Great Lakes to the Atlantic Ocean. The thi previous administrations had failed to accomplish this feat because of differences with Canada over the waterway.
Extending Social Security
Despite cutting federal spending and attempting to limit the governmen role in the economy, President Eisenhower agreed to extend the Social Security system to an additional 10 million people. He also extended unemployment payments to 4 million more citizens. Eisenhower even agreed to raise the minimum wage and to continue to provide some government aid to farmers.
By the time Eisenhower ran for a second term in 1956, the nation h; successfully shifted back to a peacetime economy. The battles between liberals and conservatives over whether to continue New Deal policies would continue. In the meantime, most Americans focused their energy enjoying what had become a decade of tremendous prosperity.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining What conservative measures did Eisenhower take during his administration?
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Contrasting How does a dosed shop differ from a union shop?
2.	Defining What is meant by the term dynamic conservatism! 17B
Using Your Notes
3.	Summarizing Use the notes you completed to write a paragraph summarizing the state of the U.S. economy after World War II. 17B
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Identifying What happened when the nation returned to a peacetime economy, and how did government try to ease the transition? 17B
5.	Describing How did the Truman administration seek to cor New Deal goals? 9F.17B
6.	Analyzing How did Eisenhower's presidency signal a more conservative direction for the government? 17B
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Suppose that you area member of Congress w heard Truman deliver his speech on the Fair Deal. Write a spt convincing your fellow members of Congress to pass or defe, Truman's Fair Deal measures. 9F, 17B 434
networks
There's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
JackKerouac |gf BIOGRAPHY Elvis Presley gf IMAGE Amer can Bandstand IMAGE
Computer Technology Ef IMAGE Fight ng Polio I2f IMAGE Suburban Housing ef IMAGE Telev sion VIDEO
Women in Cinema ef INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK
QUIZ
; F t’ ~

FB
r £
Reading HELPDESK
r
Academic Vocabulary
• phenomenon > conform
Content Vocabulary
< baby boom
•	white-collar job
•	blue-collar worker
•	multinational corporation
•	franchise
•	rock'n'roll
•	generation gap
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Sequencing As you read, use a time line to record major events of science, technology, and popular culture during the late 1940s and 1950s.
TCKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and SkilIs 17B identify the causes of prosperity in the 1950s, including the Baby Boom and the impact of the Gl Bill (Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944), and the effects of prosperity in the 1950s such as increased consumption and the growth of agriculture and business
continued on the next page
LESSON 2
The Affluent Society
wdoes prosperity change the way people live?
It Matters Because
For many Americans, the 1950s was a time of affluence, with many new technological breakthroughs. In addition, new forms of entertainment created a generational divide between young people and adults.
American Abundance
guiding question How did the lives ofAmericans change after World War II?
The 1950s was a decade of incredible prosperity. Between 1940 and 1955, the average income ofU.S. families roughly tripled. People in all income brackets were experiencing a rapid rise in income. In 1958 economist John Kenneth Galbraith published The Affluent Society, in which he claimed that the nations postwar prosperity was a new phenomenon. Galbraith suggested that whereas past societies had an “economy of scarcity” with limited economic productivity, the United States had now created an “economy of abundance.” New business techniques and technology enabled the production of abundant goods and services. They dramatically raised the U.S. standard of living.
With more disposable income than ever, Americans began spending on new consumer goods. Advertising helped fuel the spending spree. It became the United States’s fastest-growing industry. Manufacturers employed new, carefully planned marketing techniques to create consumer demand for their products.
The Growth of Suburbia
Advertisers targeted consumers with money to spend, many of whom lived in new mass-produced suburbs that grew up around cities in the 1950s. Levittown, New York, was one of the earliest of the mass-produced suburbs. It was the brainchild of Bill Levitt, who mass-produced hundreds of simple, similar-looking homes 10 miles east of New York City. Between 1947 and 1951, families rushed to buy the inexpensive homes. Similar suburbs multiplied throughout the nation. The suburban population doubled, while the population of cities rose only 10 percent.
Postwar America 435
CHARTS/GRAPHS
THE BIRTHRATE,
1940-1970 (continued from p. 435)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 17D identify actions of government and the private sector such as the Great Society, affirmative action, and Title IX to create economic opportunities for citizens and analyze the unintended consequences of each 25A describe how the characteristics and issues in U.S. history have been reflected in various genres of art, music, film, and literature 25B describe both the positive and negative impacts of significant examples of cultural movements in art, music, and literature such as Tin Pan Alley, the Harlem Renaissance, the Beat Generation, rock and roll, the Chicano Mural Movement, and country and western music on American society
25C identify the impact of popular American culture on the rest of the world overtime
25D analyze the global diffusion of American culture through the entertainment industry via various media
26C explain how the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, gender, and religious groups shape American culture
continued on p. 438
phenomenon an event or occurrence that is exceptional or unusual
baby boom a marked rise in birthrate, such as occurred in the United States following World War II
white-collar job a job in a
field not requiring work clothes or protective clothing, such as sales
blue-collar worker
a worker who performs manual labor, particularly work that requires protective clothing
multinational corporation large corporation with overseas investments
franchise the right or license to market a company's goods or services in an area, such as a store ofa chain operation
1	Analyzing In what year was there the greatest increase in the number of live births? Why might this be?
2	Drawing Conclusions What economic consequences does a society with a "baby boom" have to face when that generation reaches retirement age?
Year
*per 1,000 population for women 15-44 years old.
Source: Historical Statistics of the United States.
Reasons for suburban growth varied. Some people wished to escape 1 crime and congestion of the city. Others believed suburbs offered a bette life and were more affordable. The GI Bill and the government’s decision give income tax deductions for mortgage and property tax payments ma home ownership more attractive than ever. Between 1940 and 1960, the percentage of Americans who owned their homes rose from about 41 percent to about 61 percent.
The Baby Boom
The U.S. birthrate exploded after World War II. From 1945 to 1961, mor than 65 million children were born in the United States. At the height of this baby boom, a child was born every seven seconds. Many factors contributed to the baby boom. First, young couples who had put off gett married during World War II and the Korean War could finally begin th families. Also, the government encouraged the growth of families by offering generous GI benefits for home purchases. Finally, popular culti celebrated pregnancy, parenthood, and large families.
The Changing Workplace
As the economy grew, ongoing mechanization of farms and factories mean! more Americans began working in offices in what came to be called white-collar jobs. These employees typically wore a white dress shirt and a tie to work instead of the blue denim work shirts of factory workers and laborers 1956 white-collar workers outnumbered blue-collar workers for the first t The shift to white-collar jobs was partly the result of both new technology and management innovations introduced into the workplac the 1950s, the first business computers came on the market. Payroll, bil inventory, record-keeping, and scientific and engineering calculations < all be done by computers. As companies began to use computers, mana were able to consolidate clerical tasks across departments. This meant f clerical workers were needed and these tasks could be done faster and i
reliably. People could focus on management tasks.
Many white-collar employees worked for large corporations. To be n competitive, some corporations expanded overseas. They became multinational corporations, locating near raw materials and benefiting a cheap labor pool. Also during this time, another management innovati the franchise became popular. In a franchise, a person owns and runs < more stores of a larger chain. Believing that consumers valued dependabi and familiarity, the owners of chain operations required their franchises
436
conform to a uniform look and stvle r>nin„ j u .	>
rr...,	u oiyie. Doing so made each stores operations
more efficient and consistent and helped to reduce costs
Many other corporate leaders also expected conformity rather than freethinking Socio ogist David Riesman and others criticized this trend.
In his 1950 book The Lonely Crowd, Riesman argued that conformity was changing people. He claimed that people used to judge themselves on the basis of their own values and the esteem of their families. But now, he said, The American is said to be shallower, freer with his money, friendlier, more uncertain of himself and his values, more demanding of approval.
[This attitude of] other-direction is becoming the typical character of the new’ middle class.” In his 1956 book The Organization Man, William H. Whyte, Jr., attacked the similarity many businesses cultivated in their employees to keep any individual from dominating.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing How did corporations change the lives of Americans?
Scientific Advances
guiding question How did technological advances change sodety?
As the United States experienced social changes during the postwar era, it also witnessed important scientific advances. During the 1950s, scientists broke new ground in electronics, aviation, and medicine.
Advances in Electronics and Aviation
The electronics industry advanced rapidly after World War II. In 1947 three U.S. physicists developed the transistor, a tiny electric generator that made it possible to create small portable radios.
The computer age also dawned in the postwar era. In 1946 scientists developed one of the nation’s earliest computers, ENIAC (Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer), to make military calculations. Several years later, a newer model, UNIVAC (Universal Automatic Computer), processed business data and started the computer revolution.
Aviation progressed rapidly as well. Aircraft designers used more plastics and light metals, swept-back wings, and new jet engine technology to build planes that could fly farther on the same amount of fuel. These advances made airline travel affordable for more people.
I
Dr.JonasSalk(1914-1995) Jonas Salk enrolled in college as a prelaw student but soon changed his mind. He switched his major to premed and went on to become a research scientist. Sometimes he made rounds in the overcrowded polio wards of a hospital near his lab, where nurses described their feelings of helpless rage. One nurse said, "I can remember how the staff used to kid Dr. Salk—kidding in earnest—telling him to hurry up and do something."Salk became famous for the polio vaccine he developed in 1952.
i ►CRITICALTHINKING
Analyzing What character traits do ’ you think made Dr. Salk a successful
research scientist?
conform to change in a way that fits a standard or authority
Medical Breakthroughs
Prior to the 1950s, there were few effective treatments for cancer and heart attacks. Medical breakthroughs in the 1950s changed that. The development of radiation treatments and chemotherapy helped many cancer patients survive. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), developed in 1950, helped many people survive heart attacks. Doctors also learned to replace worn-out heart valves with artificial valves, and implanted the first
pacemakers in 1952.
Tuberculosis and polio had frightened Americans for decades. Tuberculosis patients were isolated in sanatoriums to prevent the spread of this highly contagious lung disease.
During the 1950s, a blood test for the disease and new antibiotics helped end fears. In 1956 tuberculosis fell from the
list of the top ten fatal diseases.
Polio epidemics typically left their victims dea or para yze Parents frantically tried to protect their children rom t e isease.
Some sent them to the country to avoid excessive contact with
Charitable donations funded the medical research that helped cure or control many childhood diseases.
SKILLS PRACTICE
Keep a list of words you hear often during class lessons and discussion. Pay attention to common words the teacher uses when asking questions or giving instructions and common words other students use when responding. Use these words when asking questions in class or during class discussions.
(continued from p. 436)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 27A explain the effects of scientific discoveries and technological innovations such as electric power, telephone and satellite communications, petroleum-based products, steel production, and computers on the economic development of the United States
27B explain how specific needs result in scientific discoveries and technological innovations in agriculture, the military, and medicine, including vaccines
27C understand the impact of technological and management innovations and their applications in the workplace and the resulting productivity enhancements for business and labor such as assembly line manufacturing, time-study analysis, robotics, computer management, and just-in-time inventory management
28A analyze how scientific discoveries, technological innovations, and the application of these by the free enterprise system, including those in transportation and communication, improve the standard of living in the United States
others. Public swimming pools and beaches were closed. Parks and playgrounds were deserted. In 1952 a record 58,000 new cases were repo Finally, research scientist Jonas Salk developed an injectable polio vaccir which became available to the public in 1955. Researcher Albert Sabin tl developed an oral polio vaccine. Safer and more convenient than Salk’s vaccine, the Sabin vaccine helped the threat of polio nearly disappear.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Evaluating What technological advancements helped treat cancer?
The New Mass Media
guiding question How did the new mass media reflect the characteristics of the time?
Regular television broadcasts had begun in the early 1940s, but there wei few stations and sets were expensive. In 1946 no more than 8,000 televisi were in use across the nation. By 1957, though, nearly 40 million sets ha< been sold, and more than 80 percent of families owned at least one televi
The Rise of Television
Early television programs included comedies, variety shows, and action programs. In 1953 Lucille Ball and her husband, Desi Arnaz, starred in of the medium’s most popular shows ever, a comedy called I Love Lucy. One episode attracted an audience of 44 million viewers—more than fo the presidential inauguration the following day.
Many early comedy shows, such as those starring Bob Hope and Jac Benny, were adapted from radio programs. Variety shows, such as Ed Sullivan’s Toast of the Town, provided a mix of comedy, music, dance, a acrobatics. Quiz shows also drew large audiences after the 1955 debut < The $64,000 Question. Westerns such as The Lone Ranger and Gunsmokt quickly in popularity. Viewers also enjoyed police shows such as Dragn Television news and sports broadcasts grew in popularity as well. Hollywood Adapts
As television’s popularity grew, movies lost viewers. Attendance plunge from 82 million in 1946 to 36 million by 1950. By 1960, one-fifth ofth nation’s movie theaters had closed. Hollywood used contests, door priz and advertising to attract audiences, but failed. Hollywood tried 3-D movies that required the audience to wear special glasses. Viewers quickly tired of the glasses and the films’ often-silly plots.
However, Cinemascope—a process that showed movies on large, panoramic screens—finally gave Hollywood something television coi not match. Full-color spectacles like The Robe and Around the World 80 Days cost a great deal to make, but drew huge audiences and profi
Hollywood s new approach to movie-making with big investments special effects, elaborate costumes, glamorous movie stars, exciting storylines, exotic locales, and huge marketing campaigns also gave the industry an edge in other parts of the world. As television spread in Ei it cost European movie studios their audiences, just as it had America] movie studios. But because television had spread across the United St< sooner than Europe, the Hollywood studios had already adapted, and quickly won over large European audiences. As a result, Hollywood be play an important role in diffusing American culture across the globe-role that continues to the present day.
438
Radio Draws Them In
Television also forced the radio industry to change. Television made radio comedies, dramas, and soap operas obsolete. Radio stations responded by broadcasting recorded music, news, weather, sports, and talk shows.
a to a one audience that television could not reach—people traveling in their cars. People commuting from the suburbs, running errands, or traveling on long road trips relied on radio for news and entertainment. As a result, the number of radio stations more than doubled between 1948 and 1957.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Making Connections Why is television considered part ofthe new mass media?
rock'n'roll popular music usually played on electronically amplified instruments and characterized by a persistent, heavily accented beat, much repetition of simple phrases, and often country, folk, and blues elements
generation gap a cultural separation between parents and their children
New Music and Poetry
GUIDING questions Why did young people in the 1950s develop their own popular culture? Why were the results different from those in previous generations?
Teens in every generation seek to separate themselves from their parents. In that respect, the 1950s were just like earlier decades, but the results were different for two reasons. First, teens had disposable income that could be spent on entertainment designed specifically for them. Second, the new mass media meant that teens around the country could hear the same music or see the same television shows. The new youth culture became an independent
market for the entertainment and advertising industries.
Rock'n'Roll
In 1951, at a record store in downtown Cleveland, Ohio, radio disc jockey Alan Freed noticed white teenagers buying African American rhythm-and-blues records and dancing to the music in the store. Freed convinced his manager to put the music on the air, and listeners went crazy for it. Soon, white artists began making music that stemmed from these African American sounds, creating a new form of music, rock'n'roll.
With a loud and heavy beat that made it ideal for dancing, and lyrics about themes that appealed to young people, rock ’n roll became wildly popular.
Teens bought recordings from artists such as Buddy Holly, Chuck Berry, and Bill Haley and the Comets. In
1956 teenagers found their first rock ’n roll hero in music and movie star Elvis Presley. At first, popular television host Ed Sullivan refused to invite Presley to appear on his variety show. He insisted that rock n’ roll music was not fit for a family-oriented show. After another show featuring Presley upset Sullivans high ratings, however, he relented.
Presley owed his popularity as much to his moves as to his music, swinging his hips and dancing during his performances in ways that shocked many people. Many adults condemned rock n roll as loud, mindless, and dangerous. The city council of San Antonio, Texas, banned rock ’n’ roll from the jukeboxes at public swimming poo s.
The rock n roll hits that teens bought in record numbers united them in a world their parents did not share. Thus, in the 1950s, this new music helped to create what became known as the generat.on gap, or the cultural separation between children and their parents.
During the 1950sz teens around the nation eagerly bought rock'n'roll records. The music was popular at dances called hops and even on television programs like American Bandstand.
CRITICALTHINKING
Predicting Consequences How might the rise of youth culture during the 1950s affect teens of later generations?
Postwar America 439
Chuck Berry was one of the leading popular music performers of the 1950s.
CRITICALTHINKING
Determining Cause and Effect How did Berry's popularity influence later generations of musicians?
The Beat Movement
A group of mostly white writers and artists who called themselves beats, or beatniks, highlighted a values gap in 1950s America. Beat poets, write and artists criticized American culture for its sterility, conformity, and emptiness. In 1956, 29-year-old poet Allen Ginsberg published a longp< titled “Howl” blasting American life. It began, “I saw the best minds of r generation destroyed by madness, starving hysterical naked ... burning for the ancient heavenly connection to the starry dynamo in the machin of night.” Beat author Jack Kerouac’s book On the Road (1957), about hi freewheeling adventures with a car thief and con artist, shocked some readers. Although the beat movement remained small, it laid the foundations for the widespread youth cultural rebellion of the 1960s.
LESSON 2 REVIEW
African American Entertainers
African American entertainers struggled to find acceptance. With a fe\ notable exceptions, television tended to shut out African Americans. Ii 1956 NBC gave popular African American singer Nat King Cole a 15-minute musical variety show. However, NBC was unable to find a national sponsor for a show hosted by an African American, so it canc the show two years later.
African American rock ’n’ roll singers faced fewer obstacles. Chuck Berry, Little Richard, and Ray Charles all recorded hit songs. The same era also saw the rise of several female African American
groups, including the Shirelles and the Ronettes. The music of th< early rock ’n’ roll artists profoundly influenced popular music ai the world. Little Richard and Chuck Berry, for example, inspire the Beatles, whose music swept Britain a the world in the 1960s.
Despite the advances in music and th economic boom of the 1950s, not all Americans were part of the new society, many minorities and rural poor, the Am< Dream remained well out of reach.
,3U5«
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Determining Cause and Effect What made rock'n'roll part of the new culture of the 15
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Contrasting How did white-collar jobs and blue-collar jobs differ?
17B 17D 27C
2.	Defining What is the generation gap?
Using Your Notes
3.	Explaining Use the notes you completed during the lesson to write a short paragraph explaining some of the major changes that took place during the 1950s. 17B, 17D, 25A, 25B, 27A, 27B, 27C, 28A
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Describing How did the lives of Americans change after World War II? 17B, 25A, 25C, 27C
5.	Analyzing Cause and Effect How did technological adva change society? 27A, 27B, 27C, 28A
6.	Making Connections How did the new mass media refle characteristics of the time? 25A, 25B
7.	Evaluating Why did young people in the 1950s develop t own popular culture? 25A, 25B
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Think about U.S. youth culture today. Consid is similar to and different from the youth culture of the 195 write a short essay in which you give your opinions about I youth culture can influence society, and whether youth cul important as adult culture. 440
r
Academic Vocabulary
• income • entity
It matters because
During the 1950s, about 20 percent of the American population—particularly people of color and those living in the inner cities and Appalachia—did not share in the general prosperity. Experts also worried about the rise in juvenile delinquency.
Content Vocabulary
poverty line urban renewal termination policy juvenile delinquency
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read, use the major headings of this section to create an outline similar to the one below.
The Other Side of American Life I. Poverty Amid Prosperity A.

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 17B identify the causes of prosperity in the 1950s, including the Baby Boom and the impact of the GI Bill (Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944), and the effects of prosperity in the 1950s such as increased consumption and the growth of agriculture and business
17C describe the economic impact of defense spending on the business cycle and education priorities from 1945 to the 1990s
Poverty Amid Prosperity
img question Are the people and regions most affected by poverty today the same as in the 1950s?
The 1950s saw a large expansion of the middle class. At least one in five Americans, or about 30 million people, however, lived below the poverty line. This imaginary marker is a figure the government sets to reflect the minimum income required to support a family. Many Americans mistakenly thought that the country’s prosperity had provided for everyone.
The poor included single mothers and the elderly; minorities such as Puerto Ricans and Mexican immigrants; rural Americans— both African American and white; and inner-city residents, who remained stuck in crowded slums. Many Native Americans endured poverty whether they stayed on reservations or migrated to cities. The Decline of the Inner City
Poverty was most apparent in the nation’s urban centers. As middle-class families moved to the suburbs, they left behind the poor and less educated. Many city centers deteriorated because they no longer received taxes from their former middle-class residents. Cities could no longer provide adequate public transportation, housing, and other services.
When government tried to help inner-city residents, it often made matters worse. Urban renewal programs tried to eliminate poverty by tearing down slums and building new high-rises for poor residents. Yet these crowded projects often created an
Postwar America 441
atmosphere of violence. The government also unwittingly created a condition supporting poverty with a rule that evicted residents of publ housing as soon as they began earning a higher income.
poverty line a level of personal or family income below which one is classified as poor by the federal government
African Americans
Although more than 3 million African Americans had migrated from t South to Northern cities, long-standing patterns of racial discriminatic kept many of them poor. In 1958 African Americans’ salaries, on avera were only 51 percent of what whites earned.
In 1959 the play A Raisin in the Sun, written by African American authi Lorraine Hansberry, opened on Broadway. The play told the story of a working-class African American family struggling against poverty and racism. Hansberry wrote: “The ghettos are killing us; not only our dreams but our very bodies.”
income a gain or recurrent benefit usually measured in money derived from capital or labor
urban renewal government programs that attempt to eliminate poverty and revitalize urban areas
termination policy
a government policy to bring Native Americans into mainstream society by withdrawing recognition of Native American groups as legal entities
Hispanics
Much of the nations Hispanic population also struggled with poverty. Nearly 5 million Mexicans had come to the United States through the Bracero Program to work on farms and ranches in the Southwest. Brae were temporary contract workers. Many later returned home, but som< 350,000 settled permanently in the United States. They worked long he for little pay, in conditions that were often unbearable. The migrant work list of grievances included “poor food . . . substandard housing, prejud and discrimination, physical mistreatment and exposure to pesticides. and unsatisfactory earnings,” according to one Bracero Program histor Native Americans
entity something having independent, separate, or self-contained existence
Eight family members lived in this three-room house lined with newspaper in Appalachia in the 1950s.
CRITICALTHINKING
Drawing Conclusions Besides inadequate housing, what other effects did poverty have on people? By the middle of the 1900s, Native Americans—who made up less than one percent of the population—were the poorest ethnic group in the nation. Afti World War II, the United States government launched a program to bring Native Americans into mainstream society. Under the plan, which became known as the termination policy, the federal government withdrew all official recognition of the Native American groups as legal entities and ma them subject to the same laws as white citizens. Another program encouraged Native Americans to relocate from their reservations to cities.
For many Native Americans, relocation was a disaster. For example the mid-1950s, the Welfare Council of Minneapolis said of Native Arne living conditions: “One Indian family of five or six, living in two rooir will take in relatives and friends who come from the reservations seeki jobs until perhaps fifteen people will be crowded into space.” During the 1950s, Native Americans in Minneapolis could expect to live only 37 years, comps to 68 years for other Minneapolis residents. Benjamin Reifel, a Sioux, described the despair the termination policy produced: “The Indians believed that when the clouds of war passed from the skies overhead, their ris tide of expectations, though temporarily stalled, woul< again reappear. Instead they were threatened by termination. . . . Soaring expectations began to plunge Appalachia
The mountainous region of Appalachia, stretching fron New York to Georgia, often kept poverty hidden. Coal mining, long the backbone of the Appalachian econom mechanized in the 1950s, causing soaring unemployme
Some 1.5 million people left Appalachia to seek a better life in the cities. Appalachia had fewer doctors than the rest of the country, and rates of nutritional deficiency and infant mortality were high. Schooling was considered even worse than in inner-city slums.
g READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What are two regions where poverty was most prevalent in the 1950s, and why was their level of prosperity so low?
Juvenile Delinquency
guidingquestion Wh at factors were blamed for the rise in juvenile delinquency?
During the 1950s, many middle-class white Americans found it easy to ignore poverty and racism. Some social problems, however, became impossible to ignore. Juvenile delinquency—antisocial or criminal behavior of young people—became one of those problems when the United States saw a 45 percent rise in juvenile crime rates between 1948 and 1953.
Americans disagreed on what had triggered the rise. Experts blamed television, movies, comic books, racism, busy parents, a rising divorce rate, lack of religion, and anxiety over the military draft. Some cultural critics claimed that young people were rebelling against the conformity of their parents. Others blamed a lack of discipline. Bishop Fulton J. Sheen complained that parents had raised bored children who sought new thrills, such as “alcohol, marijuana, even murder.” Still others pointed at social causes, blaming teen violence on poverty. Most teens stayed clear of gangs, drugs, and crime. Still, the public stereotyped young people as juvenile delinquents, especially those who had long hair or used street slang.
Concerned about their children, many parents focused on the schools as a possible solution. When baby boomers began entering the school system in the 1950s, enrollments increased by 13 million, and school districts struggled to pay for new buildings and hire more teachers. In 1957 the Soviet Unions launch of Sputnik I and Sputnik II, the world’s first space satellites, caused more panic about education. Many felt that the nation had fallen behind its Cold War enemy. They blamed what they saw as a lack of technical education. Efforts to improve math and science education began. Yet fears about the nation’s young people lingered at the end of the decade.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Evaluating Why do you think schools were a possible solution for juvenile delinquency?
juvenile delinquency
antisocial or criminal behavior of young people
Connections to
TODAY
Juvenile Delinquency
Teens are more involved in crime, drugs, and gangs today than they were in the 1950s. There are four times as many juvenile court cases as there were in 1960. In the late 1990s, about 2 million juveniles (ages 10-17) were arrested, mostly for drug-related crimes. Many of these crimes were committed by juveniles in gangs. The number of juvenile cases has dropped in the past decade, but gang crimes are on the rise.
SKILLS PRACTICE
There are many words and phrases from the 1950s you still hear today. As you listen to the teacher’s lesson, take notes about the definition and meaning of key words and phrases, such as poverty line, urban renewal, and juvenile delinquency.
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Defining If someone is living below the poverty line, what does that mean? 17B
2.	Explaining Why did some people stereotype certain young people as juvenile delinquents?
Using Your Notes
3.	Making Connections Use your notes from the lesson to determine what caused some young people to become juvenile delinquents and how society responded with solutions.
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Evaluating Are the people and regions most affected by poverty today the same as in the 1950s?
5.	Identifying What factors were blamed for the rise in juvenile delinquency? 17C
Writing Activity
NARRATIVE
You are a writer for your school newspaper. This month's paper is featuring a throwback to the 1950s. Write an article that highlights a social problem affecting your generation that parallels problems in the 1950s. Postwar America 443
chapter 14 Assessment
■
JBB
Directions: On a separate sheet of paper, answer the questions below. Make sure you read carefully and
answer all parts of the questions.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Describing What impact did the decrease in military spending have on the economy and business cycle after World War II? 17C
0 Explaining What impact did the Taft-Hartley Act have on organized labor?
0 Analyzing How did the GI Bill boost the postwar economy? 17B
0 Identifying How did the Democratic Party split when Truman ran in the 1948 presidential election?
0 Summarizing Summarize the actions by the Eisenhower administration that improved transportation both on land and waterways. 17B
Lesson 2
0 Explaining Why did economist John Kenneth Galbraith believe that America's postwar economy was a new phenomenon? 17B
0 Describing Identify the new popular music of the 1950s and some of the most popular performers. How did this music reflect both the characteristics and issues of the era? What was its positive and negative impact? 25A, 25B
0 Describing Describe the business philosophy behind franchises. Has this viewpoint shifted or remained the same? 27C
0 Evaluating In what ways did beat poets express the characteristics and issues of the 1950s? What was the
positive and negative impact of the Beat movement?
25B
© Explaining What contributions did women perfori
make to the shaping of American culture in the 195C
21
© Identifying Which significant medical breakthrou were made in the 1950s? 27B
© Explaining How did African American singers coni to American culture in the 1950s? What obstacles di they face? 26C
Lesson 3
© Comparing and Contrasting Explain how the live minorities differed from those of white middle-das Americans during the 1950s.
© Economics What factors negatively affected the economy of Appalachia in the 1950s?
© Describing Describe the conditions for Native Americans in the mid-1900s, as well as the governn policies implemented and the struggles that followed implementation.
© Analyzing What were some factors that people bi contributed to a rise in juvenile delinquency, and h< they try to solve the problem?
Exploring the Essential Questions
© Presenting Information Design a poster titled "Prosperity in the 1950s." Use text, graphs, and illustrations to show how prosperity of the era affei the lives of many Americans, and how it did not bei others. 17B
Need Extra Help?
	12	3	4
	
5
6	7
■
8
Critical Thinking
© Making Connections The rise of large corporations increased white-collar jobs, and some sociologists thought it increased conformity, as well. Why might a culture of conformity result from the rise of large, multi-national corporations? What types of business or fields of work would be less likely to develop a culture of conformity?
© Making Generalizations What generalizations can you make about televised entertainment and the American public's interests based on the popularity of early television shows? 25A
© Analyzing Use the example ofjet engine technology to
explain how the free enterprise system drives
technological innovation. Describe how the technology
was applied in the marketplace and how this in turn
improved the standard of living for Americans.
27A, 28A, 28C
0 Evaluating Summarize Truman's legislative goals during his first term as president and the proposals in the Fair Deal that were enacted by the time Truman left office. Why do you think some policies were not adopted?
0 Describing How did the management's introduction of the business computer impact the workplace, and enhance productivity for both business and workers? 27C
© Analyzing What impact did American popular culture in the 1950s have on the rest of the world? What contributed to the diffusion of American culture around ^e^lobe?
(Q Explaining Who invented the polio vaccine and why was it needed? How did vaccines and antibiotics change American society? 27B
© Identifying Central Issues What action did President Truman take to address the rights of minorities in the military? 9F
Social Studies Skills
© Understanding Relationships Among Events What conditions in the postwar United States contributed to the baby boom? How did the baby boom contribute to the prosperity of the era? 17B
© Identifying Cause and Effect What changes in the private sector created new economic opportunities for Americans in the 1950s? 17D
Sequencing Make a timeline of important events of the 1950s postwar America, as reflected in the chapter. 29B
DBQ
Analyzing Primary Sources
Read the excerpt below and then answer the questions that follow.
PRIMARY SOURCE
«[It would] reverse the basic direction of our national labor policy, inject the Government into private economic affairs on an unprecedented scale, and conflict with important principles of our democratic society. Its provisions would cause more strikes, not fewer.”
S.
Truman, message to the U.S. House of Representatives, June 20,1947 © Interpreting Primary Sources What legislation is Truman opposing in the message above? What argument is he making that he thinks will appeal to Republicans and conservative Democrats? 17D
(J) Drawing Inferences Taking into account the date of the message and the groups that made up the New Deal coalition, what political factors do you think influenced Truman's message above? 17D
Need Extra Help?
^te^^^j4^^43T|436 |438T437 I 1 436 | 436 | 427 | 431 | 431
Postwar America 445
Analyzing Visuals
Use the graph to answer the following questions.
Year
Source: The First Measured Century.
Geographic Distributions and Patterns Approximately what percentage ofthe total population lived in the suburbs in 1910? How long did it take for the percentage of suburban dwellers to double, compared to what it had been in 1910? 31B
Making Predictions Consider the information from the graph and what you've learned in this chapter. What developments in the 1950s contributed to this geographic pattern and what consequences can you predict would happen in the future? 31B
@ Posing Questions About Geographic Patterns What questions do you need to answer to know if the trend shown above resulted in the predictions you made in the previous question. Write a brief report identifying the questions that you need to answer. Conduct research at the library or online to find out if what you predicted actually occurred between the 1990s and the 2010s. Add the results to your report. 31B
Extended Response Question
© Comparing and Contrasting Write an expository e that compares and contrasts the postwar domestic agendas of President Harry Truman and President Dw Eisenhower. Your essay should include an introductioi at least two paragraphs that categorizes how their idi and approaches to domestic issues were similar and different. 17B, 29B, 30A
Standardized Test Practice
What was the reason for the passage ofthe 22nd Amendment? 21B
A.	to ensure that the president's veto powers are lii
B.	to ensure that presidents are limited to only twc terms in office
C.	to ensure that the military is desegregated
D.	to ensure that veterans are guaranteed the righ an education
© What event led to defense spending to promote ediii in science, math, and technical subjects? 17C
F.
The construction of ENIAC, an early computer G.
The launch of Sputnik H.
The Berlin Airlift J.
The discovery of a polio vaccine Need Extra Help?
	31	32	33	34	35	36
, Go to page	1 427 j 427 | 427 | 427 | 432,437 |
446
The New Frontier and the Great Society
1960-1968
networks
There's More Online about the United States during the Kennedy and Johnson administrations.
CHAPTER 1 5
Lesson 1
The New Frontier
Lesson 2
JFK and the Cold War
Lesson 3
The Great Society
The Story Matters...
When U.S. intelligence discovered Soviet nuclear missile silos in Cuba, just 90 miles from the United States, the bright New Frontier that President Kennedy had promised Americans seemed very far away. During the 13-day standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union, there was increasing fear that nuclear strikes would occur. The crisis was resolved when President Kennedy helped negotiate both nations away from the brink of nuclear war.
◄ John F. Kennedy won a narrow victory in the 1960 presidential election. During his administration, Kennedy faced both foreign and domestic challenges.
PHOTO:
SuperStock/Getty Images 447
