CHAPTER 17
Place andTime: Vietnam 1954-1975
The United States wanted to stop the spread of communism after the French defeat by Communist forces in 1954. American involvement in Vietnam would result in eight years of war and the loss of thousands of American lives.
Step Into the Place
Read the quotes and look at the information presented on the map. 8D, 8E, 29A, 29B, 29F
Analyzing Historical Documents How do these statements by Ho Chi Minh and General William Westmoreland demonstrate the varying beliefs regarding how Vietnam should be controlled?
DBQ
PRIMARY SOURCE
a [W]e, members of the Provisional Government of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam, solemnly declare to the world that Viet-Nam has the right to be a free and independent country—and in fact it is so already. The entire Vietnamese people are determined to mobilize all their physical and mental strength, to sacrifice their lives and property in order to safeguard their independence and liberty.99
—Ho Chi Minh, from the Declaration of Independence of Vietnam, 1945
PRIMARY SOURCE
« The objective of the United States government in Vietnam was made clear by the Truman Doctrine of 1947. The Truman Doctrine came after World War II had been concluded, the fighting had stopped, and international arrangements were in disarray. It became very clear that the Soviet Union was going to grab as much real estate as possible in the aftermath of that great war. Thus, the Truman Doctrine said in essence:'We will not allow a little country to be pushed around and be taken over by the communists. Somebody has to come to their rescue and we will do that.'99
—General William C. Westmoreland, from Vietnam in Perspective, 1987
Eisenhower
1953-1961
Step Into the Time	/g\
Predicting Consequences IIMIJMIJfflWI rwW
Choose an event from the time
line and write a paragraph that
Ke
196
1955 U.S. military aid	/
and advisers are sent to	A
South Vietnam	I

MAP
Explore the ISlI interartivp uprcim interactive version of this map on Networks.
e's More Online!
April 30, 1975:
The last Americans left the U.S. Embassy, and South Vietnam officially surrendered to the North.
110’E
100E
1964 Congress passes Gulf of Tonkin Resolution
1965 U.S. combat troops land in Vietnam
Nixon
1969-1974
1973 Last U.S. troops leave Vietnam
January 1968 Tet
Offensive begins
August 1968 Antiwar protest in Chicago
April 1970 Nixon orders invasion of Cambodia
May 1970 National Guard troops kill student protesters at Kent State University
networks
Academic Vocabulary
• strategic • traditional
Content Vocabulary
wyconflktdMdepeople •government during iwvtiii
It matters Because
In the late 1940s and early 1950s, most Americans knew little about Indochina, France's colony in Southeast Asia. During the Cold War, however, American officials became concerned that the region might fall to communism.

American Involvement in Vietnam
guidingquestion Why did the United States provide military aid to the French in Indochina?
•	domino theory
•	napalm
•	guerrilla
•	Agent Orange
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details

Organizing Complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below by providing the reasons the United States aided France in Vietnam.
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 8D explain reasons and outcomes for U.S. involvement in foreign countries and their relationship to the Domino Theory, including the Vietnam War 8E analyze the major issues and events of the Vietnam War such as the Tet Offensive, the escalation of forces, Vietnamization, and the fall of Saigon
continued on p. 502
In 1940 Japan invaded Vietnam, becoming one of a series of foreign nations to rule the Asian country. The Chinese had controlled the region for hundreds of years. Then, from the late 1800s until World War II, the French ruled Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia—a region then known as French Indochina.
The Growth of Vietnamese Nationalism
By the early 1900s, nationalism had become a powerful force in Vietnam. Several political parties pushed for independence or for reform of French colonial rule. Among the leaders of the nationalist movement was Nguyen That Thanh—better known by his assumed name, Ho Chi Minh. After years in Europe, China, and the Soviet Union, he returned to Southeast Asia. There, he helped found the Indochinese Communist Party in 1930 and worked for independence.
Ho Chi Minh’s activities forced him to flee Indochina and spew several years in exile in the Soviet Union and China. In 1941 he returned to Vietnam. By then, Japan had seized control of the country. Ho Chi Minh organized a nationalist group called the Vietminh, which united Communists and non-Communists in the effort to expel the Japanese. Soon afterward, the United States began sending aid to the Vietminh.
America Aids the French
When Japan surrendered to the Allies in 1945, it gave up control of Indochina. Ho Chi Minh quickly declared Vietnam’s independence. France had no intention of losing its former colony, however. French troops returned to Vietnam in 1946 and drove the Vietminh into hiding
500
The Vietminh fought back against the French-dominated regime and slowly gained control of large areas of the country. As the fighting escalated, France appealed to the United States for help. The request put American officials in a difficult position. The United States opposed colonialism. It had pressured the Dutch to give up their empire in Indonesia and supported the British decision to give India independence in 1947. American officials, however, did not want Vietnam to be Communist.
China’s fall to communism and the outbreak of the Korean War helped convince President Truman to aid France. President Eisenhower continued Truman’s policy and defended his decision with what became known as the domino theory—the idea that if Vietnam fell to communism, the rest of Southeast Asia would follow, like a line of dominoes falling over.
domino theory the belief that if one nation in Asia fell to the Communists, neighboring countries would follow
Defeat at Dien Bien Phu
Despite aid from the United States, the French continued to struggle against the Vietminh, who used hit-and-run and ambush tactics. These are the tactics of guerrillas, irregular troops who blend into the civilian population and are difficult for regular armies to fight. Rising casualties and a lack of victories made the war unpopular with the French public.
The turning point came in the mountain town of Dien Bien Phu. By seizing the town, the French planned to cut the Vietminh’s supply lines and force them into open battle. Soon afterward, a huge Vietminh force surrounded Dien Bien Phu and began bombarding the town. On May 7,1954, the French forces fell to the Vietminh. The defeat convinced the French to make peace and withdraw from Indochina.
guerrilla member of an armed band that carries out surprise attacks and sabotage rather than open warfare
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Several factors contributed to American involvement in Vietnam.
PLACES AND REGIONS
IVhflf aspects of a Communist Vietnam threatened Japan's economy?
Ho Chi Minh, Communist leader of North Vietnam, was determined to reunite Vietnam and began arming Vietcong guerrillas to seize power in South Vietnam.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Why did American involvement in Vietnam grow after the Geneva Accords? strategic important to the conduct or success of a larger plan
traditional set by custom; handed down from one generation to another
(continued from p. 500)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 20A describe the impact of events such as the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution and the War Powers Act on the relationship between the legislative and executive branches of government
26F discuss the importance of congressional Medal of Honor recipients, including individuals of all races and genders such as Vernon J. Baker, Alvin York, and Roy Benavidez
N^gohaho^to end the conflict were held in Geneva, Switzerland. The resulting Geneva Accords provided for a temporary division of Vietnam along the 17th parallel Ho Chi Minh and the Vietminh controlled North Vietnam, and a pro-Western regime led by the fiercely anti-Communist Ngo Dinh Diem (ehn. GOH DIHN deh.EHM) held the South. French troops soon left, and the United States became the principal protector of the new government in South Vietnam.
The accords called for elections to be held in 1956 to reunite the country under a single government. Diem refused to permit the elections, however, fearing Ho Chi Minh would win. Eisenhower approved of Diems actions
i a	•__~ z J 4-^	Aof n o m
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Analyzing Why did the United States protect South Vietnam?
American Involvement Deepens
GUIDING QUESTION
How did American involvement in Vietnam change during the Kennedy and Johnson administrations? After Ngo Dinh Diem refused to hold national elections, Ho Chi Minh and the Communists began an armed struggle to reunify the nation. They organized a new guerrilla army of South Vietnamese Communists, which became known as the Vietcong. Eisenhower sent hundreds of military advisers to train South Vietnam’s army, but the Vietcong continued to grow more powerful because many Vietnamese opposed Diem’s government. By 1961, the Vietcong had established control over much of the countryside. Kennedy Takes Over
When President Kennedy took office in 1961, he continued to support South Vietnam, believing the country was vital in the battle against communism. From 1961 to late 1963, the number of U.S. military personnel in South Vietnam jumped from about 2,000 to around 15,000. Yet they failed to shore up the floundering Diem regime. For example, the South Vietnamese created special fortified villages known as strategic hamlets. They then moved villagers to these hamlets, despite the peasants’ resentment at being uprooted from their villages. The program proved to be extremely unpopular.
The Overthrow of Diem
American officials blamed Diem. He made himself even more unpopular by discriminating against Buddhism, one of the country’s most widely practiced religions. In the spring of 1963, he banned the traditional religious flags for the Buddhas birthday. When Buddhists protested in the streets, Diem’s police killec nine people. In response, a Buddhist monk poured gasoline over his robes and set himself on fire, the first of several to do so. Images of their self-destruction horrified Americans as they watched the footage on television news reports.
In August 1963, U.S. ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge arrived in Vietnam. He learned that several Vietnamese generals were plotting to overthrow the unpopular Diem. When Lodge expressed U.S. sympathy for their cause, the generals launched a military coup, seizing power on November 1, 1963. They executed Diem soon after. Despite his unpopularity, Diem had been a respecte< nationalist. After his death, South Vietnam’s government weakened.
Johnson and Vietnam
Just three weeks after Diem’s death, Kennedy was assassinated. The presidency—and the growing problem of Vietnam—now belonged to
ent Lyndon B. Johnson. Although he approached Vietnam cautiously
502
at first, Johnson wanted to keep the country from falling to the Communists. Additionally, some had blamed Democrats when China became Communist in 1949. Should the Democrats lose Vietnam, Johnson feared, it might “shatter my Presidency, kill my administration, and damage our democracy.”
On August 2, 1964, Johnson announced that North Vietnamese torpedo boats had fired on two U.S. destroyers in the Gulf of Tonkin. Two days later, he reported another attack. Insisting that these were unprovoked, he ordered American aircraft to attack North Vietnamese ships and naval facilities.
Johnson then asked Congress for the authority to defend American forces and allies in Southeast Asia. Congress readily agreed, and on August 7,1964, it passed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution. This authorized the president to “take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the United States and to prevent further aggression.” Soon after, the Vietcong began to attack bases where American advisers were stationed in South Vietnam. After one particularly damaging attack, Johnson sent American aircraft to bomb North Vietnam.
ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
Should America Fight in Vietnam?
As the war in Vietnam dragged on, Americans became increasingly divided about the nation's role in the conflict.
In January 1966, George W. Ball delivered an address to indicate "how we got [into Vietnam] and why we must stay."George F. Kennan, a former ambassador to the Soviet Union, argued that American involvement in Vietnam was "something we would not choose deliberately if the choice were ours to make all over again today."
---------YES----------------
u [T]he conflict in Viet-Nam is a product of the great shifts and changes triggered by the Second World War.... [T]he Soviet Union under Stalin exploited the confusion to push out the perimeter of its power and influence in an effort to extend the outer limits of Communist domination by force or the threat of force....
The bloody encounters in [Vietnam]... are
thus in a real sense battles and skirmishes in a continuing war to prevent one Communist power after another from violating internationally recognized boundary lines fixing the outer limits of Communist dominion....
In the long run our hopes for the people of South Viet-Nam reflect our hopes for people everywhere. What we seek is a world living in peace and freedom.”
—from a speech delivered January 30,1966
George W. Ball Undersecretary of State
--------- NO --------------
« Vietnam is not a region of major military-industrial importance....
[E]ven a situation in which South Vietnam was controlled exclusively by the Vietcong... would not present, in my opinion, dangers great enough to justify our direct military intervention.
And to attempt to crush North Vietnamese
strength to a point where Hanoi could no longer give any support for Vietcong political activity in the South would... have the effect of bringing in Chinese forces at some point....
Our motives are widely misinterpreted; and the spectacle of Americans inflicting grievous injury on the lives of a poor and helpless people... produces reactions among millions of people throughout the world profoundly detrimental to the image we would like them to hold of this country.”
—from testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, February 10,1966
George F. Kennan Former diplomat
DBQ
Analyzing Historical Documents Q
Identifying Central Ideas Why does Ball believe that the United States is justified in fighting in Vietnam? © Comparing and Contrasting What is the fundamental difference between the views of Ball and Kennan?
The Vietnam War 503
BIOGRAPHIES
Helicopters allowed U.S. troops to get in and out of jungles and mountainous areas in Vietnam.
CRITICAL THINKING
Determining Cause and Effect How did the Vietnamese landscape make troop movements difficult?
Roy P. Benavidez (1935-1998)
Roy P. Benavidez received the Medal of Honor, the nation's highest award for heroism, for action in the Vietnam War. In May 1968, Benavidez went to the aid of Special Forces team members who were wounded and surrounded, unable to get to a helicopter. Benavidez ran 80 yards through enemy fire. Wounded three times in getting to the men, he stayed with them some eight hours, preparing an evacuation. During that time, he was wounded two more times. While carrying men to the rescue helicopter, he was attacked from behind, but managed to kill his attacker in hand-to-hand combat. Only after loading all the dead and wounded, did Benavidez board the helicopter. His actions saved the lives of at least eight other men.
Both the American public and Johnson’s advisers generally supported these actions. Some officials disagreed, however. Undersecretary of State George Ball initially supported involvement in Vietnam, but later turned against it. He warned that if the United States go. too involved, it would be difficult to get out. “Once on the tiger’s back, he warned, we cannot be
sure of picking the place to dismount.
Other advisers, such as National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy, believed that success in Vietnam was important to protect American interests and maintain stability in Southeast Asia. In a memo to the president, he argued:
PRIMARY SOURCE
« The stakes in Vietnam are extremely high. The American investment is very large, and American responsibility is a fact of life which is palpable in the atmosphere of Asia, and even elsewhere.The international prestige of the U.S. and a substantial part of our influence are directly at risk in Vietnam.^
—quoted in The Best and the Brightest,191
In March 1965, Johnson again expanded American involvement by ordering a sustained bombing campaign against North Vietnam. That same month, he sent the first U.S. combat troops into Vietnam.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Describing What event weakened the government of South Vietnam?
A
Bloody Stalemate guiding question What military tactics were used by the Vietcong, and how did American troops respond?
By the end of 1965, more than 180,000 U.S. combat troops were fighting in Vietnam. In 1966 that number doubled. The U.S. military entered Vietnam with great confidence. “America seemed omnipotent then ” wrote one ofth first marines to arrive, Philip Caputo, in his prologue to A Rumor of War. “[W] saw ourselves as the champions of a cause that was destined to triumph.’”
Lacking the firepower of the American forces, the Vietcong used ambushes, booby traps, and other guerrilla tactics. These techniques could be greatly destructive. Ronald J. Glasser, an American army doctor, described the devastating effects of one booby trap:
PRIMARY SOURCE
** Three quarters of the way through the tangle, a trooper brushed against a two-inch vine, and a grenade slung at chest high went off, shattering the right side of his head and body.... Nearby troopers t< hold of the unconscious soldier and, half carrying, half dragging hin pulled him the rest of the way through the tangle. M
—quoted in Vietnam, 4 History,
The Vietcong also frustrated American troops by blending in with the general population and then quickly vanishing. “It was a sheer physical impossibil to keep the enemy from slipping away whenever he wished, explained one American general.
Search and Destroy"
To counter these tactics, American troops tried tc ind enemy troops, bomb their positions, destroy t eir supply lines, and force them out into the of
for combat. American planes dropped napalm, a jellied gasoline that explodes on contact. They also used Agent Orange, a chemical that strips leaves from trees and shrubs, turning farmland and forest into wasteland.
American military leaders underestimated the Vietcong’s strength. They also misjudged the enemy’s stamina and the support they had among the South Vietnamese. American generals believed that bombing and killing large numbers of Vietcong would destroy their morale and lead them to surrender.
The guerrillas, however, had no intention of surrendering, and they were willing to accept huge losses to achieve their goals.
The Ho Chi Minh Trail
In the Vietcong’s war effort, North Vietnamese support was a major factor. Although the Vietcong included many South Vietnamese, North Vietnam provided arms, advisers, and leadership. As Vietcong casualties mounted, North Vietnam began sending North Vietnamese Army units to fight. North Vietnam sent arms and supplies south by way of a network of jungle paths known as the Ho Chi Minh Trail. The trail wound through Cambodia and Laos, bypassing the border between North Vietnam and South Vietnam.
North Vietnam itself received weapons and other support from the Soviet Union and China. Johnson feared directly attacking North Vietnam would bring China into the war, as had happened in Korea. Yet Johnson’s limits made winning the war very difficult. Instead of conquering territory, American troops had to fight a war of attrition—defeating enemy forces by wearing them down. This strategy led troops to conduct grisly body counts after battles to determine how many enemy soldiers had been killed. The American military began measuring “progress” in the war by the number of enemy dead.
Bombing from American planes killed many thousands of Vietnamese. American soldiers were also dying in increasing numbers. The notion of a quick and decisive victory grew increasingly remote. As a result, many citizens back home began to question the nation’s involvement in the war.
Chemicals such as napalm and Agent Orange devastated the landscape of Vietnam.
CRITICAL THINKING
Drawing Conclusions How might the use of chemical weapons have encouraged the South Vietnamese populace to support the Vietcong? napalm a jellied gasoline used for bombs
Agent Orange a chemical defoliant used to clear Vietnamese jungles during the Vietnam War
D READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining What two chemical weapons did the United States use in Vietnam?
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining What are guerrilla tactics? 8E
2.	Defining What was the "domino theory"? 8D
Using Your Notes
3.	Summarizing Use the notes you completed during the lesson to summarize the reasons the United States aided France in Vietnam^
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Evaluating Why did the United States provide military aid to the French in Indochina? 8D, 8E
5.	Describing How did U.S. involvement in Vietnam change during the Kennedy and Johnson administrations? 8D, 8E, 20A
6.	Analyzing What military tactics were used by the Vietcong, and how did U.S. troops respond? 8E
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Take on the role as a member of Congress in 1964. Write a statement supporting or opposing the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution. 8E, 20A The Vietnam War 505
networks
There's More Online!
Sf BIOGRAPHY Robert F. Kennedy
Ef biography William Westmoreland
Ef GRAPHIC NOVEL The Lottery
Ef PRIMARYSOURCE Vietnam Political Cartoons
Ef video The Peace Movement
Ef interactive self-check QUIZ

IS]
'djJ
pTOPrKEWAR/ff Vietnam NOW.

LESSON 2	-
Vietnam Divides the Nation
tmilitaiy conflict divide people the government during wartime?
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
•	media
•	disproportionate
Content Vocabulary
it matters Because
As casualties mounted in Vietnam, many Americans began to protest the war. The conflict over the war, increasing violence, and the apparent lack of progress in Vietnam led President Johnson to decide not to run again.
The Antiwar Movement Emerges
guiding question Why did Americans disagree about the Vietnam War?
•	credibility gap	•	dove	|
•	teach-in	•	hawk	I
TAKING NOTES: !
Key Ideas and Details	j
Organizing Fill in a graphic organizer j similar to the one below, listing reasons	j
for opposition to the Vietnam War.	|

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 

8E analyze the major issues and events of the Vietnam War such as the Tet Offensive, the escalation of forces, Vietnamization, and the fall of Saigon
8F describe the responses to the Vietnam War such as the draft, the 26th Amendment, the role of the media, the credibility gap, the silent majority, and the anti-war movement
continued on the next page
When the first U.S. combat troops arrived in Vietnam in the spring of 1965, about 66 percent of Americans approved of U.S. policy in Vietnam. As the war dragged on, however, public support began to wane. Media accounts seemed to contradict government reports. For example, the American commander in South Vietnam, General William Westmoreland, reported that the “enemy’s hopes are bankrupt” and “the end begins to come into view.” Yet millions of people saw images of American casualties on television in their living rooms each day as Vietnam became the first “television war.” For many people, a credibility gap had developed—they had a hard time believing what the Johnson administration said about the war.
Congress, which in the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution had granted Johnson a great deal of power to conduct the war, began to seek greater involvement. Beginning in February 1966, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee held “educational” hearings on Vietnam. They called in policy makers and critics to discuss the administration’s military strategy.
Teach-ins Begin
In March 1965, a group of faculty members and students at the University of Michigan joined together in a teach-in. They discussed the issues surrounding the war and reaffirmed their reasons for opposing it. In May 1965, 122 colleges held a “National Teach-In” by radio for more than 100,000 antiwar demonstrators.
People opposed the war for different reasons. Some saw the conflict as a civil war in which the United States should not
506
interfere. Others saw South Vietnam as a corrupt dictatorship and believed defending it was immoral.
Anger at the Draft
Thousands of demonstrators held protests against the war. Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) organized a march on Washington, D.C., that drew more than 20,000 people. A rally at the Lincoln Memorial drew tens of thousands of protesters as well.
Many protesters focused on what they saw as an unfair draft system.
Until 1969, college students could often defer military service until after graduation. Young people from working-class families unable to afford college were more likely to be drafted. Draftees were most likely to be assigned to combat units, and they commonly made up more than half of casualties. Most who served in Vietnam, however, enlisted voluntarily.
Nevertheless, a disproportionate number of working-class and minority youths went to war. Between 1961 and 1966, African Americans constituted about 10 percent of military personnel. Because African Americans were more likely to be assigned to combat units, however, they accounted for almost 20 percent of combat-related deaths. This skewed death rate angered African American leaders. In April 1967, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., publicly condemned the conflict: “I speak for the poor of America who are paying the double price of smashed hopes at home and death and corruption in Vietnam.... The great initiative in this war is ours. The initiative to stop it must be ours.” In response, military officials tried to reduce African American casualties. By wars end,
African Americans made up about 12 percent of Americas dead.
As the war escalated, an increased draft call put many college students at risk of being drafted. An estimated 500,000 draftees refused to go. Some burned their draft cards, did not show up for induction, or fled the country. From 1965 to 1968, officials prosecuted over 3,000 Americans who refused to serve. In 1969 a lottery system was instituted, so only those with low numbers were subject to the draft. Many draftees argued that if they were old enough to fight, they were old enough to vote. In 1971 the Twenty-sixth Amendment to the Constitution was ratified, giving all citizens age 18 and older the right to vote in all state and federal elections.
Hawks and Doves
In the face of growing opposition to the war, President Johnson remained determined to continue fighting, recognizing the effort as resistance to communism. He assailed his critics in Congress as selfish men who want to
— Analyzing ~~ Supreme Court cases
Tinker v. Des Moines
In 1965 students in Des Moines, Iowa, expressed their opposition to the Vietnam War by wearing black armbands to school. The school district then banned the wearing of black armbands and subsequently expelled three students who violated the policy. The students challenged their expulsion as a violation of their First Amendment right to free speech. In 1969 the Supreme Court ruled 7 to 2 in favor of the students, holding that the wearing of black armbands was a form of “symbolic expression” covered by the First Amendment. As long as their symbolic protest was not disruptive, they had a right to express their opinion.
| DBQ |
SIGNIFICANCE
How does the Tinker decision affect your right to wear a T-shirt supporting a cause you believe in? OPPOSITION TO THE VIETNAM WAR
As the Vietnam War progressed, opposition ~ to the conflict generally increased.	5
"§" §
ljjt Analyzing During which two years qJ was opposition to the war lowest? *S £ What event occurred around that	Jg*
^Predicting Consequences In what £ S year did opposition to the war peak?
What consequence might you expect this to have?
Source: Gailup News Service.
(continued from p. 506)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 21A analyze the effects of landmark U.S. Supreme Court decisions, including Brown v. Board of Education, and other U.S. Supreme Court decisions such as Plessy v. Ferguson, Hernandez v. Texas, Tinker v. Des Moines, Wisconsin v. Yoder, and White v. Regester 21B discuss historical reasons why the constitution has been amended
23A identify and analyze methods of expanding the right to participate in the democratic process, including lobbying, non violent protesting, litigation, and amendments to the U.S. Constitution
23B evaluate various means of achieving equality of political rights, including the 19th, 24th, and 26th amendments and congressional acts such as the American Indian Citizenship Act of 1924
The Vietnam War 507
media a means of expression or communication, especially in reference to the agencies of mass communication—newspapers, radio, television, and the Internet
credibility gap lack of trust or believability
teach-in an extended meeting or class held to discuss a social or political issue
advance their own interests” and was dismissive of the college protesters Johnson was not alone in his views. In time the natron seemed to be drnded into two camps. Doves wanted the United States to leave Vietnam. Hawks, however, wanted the nation to stay and fight. Some saw communism as a threat and challenged the patriotism of the doves. As the two groups debated, the war appeared to take a dramatic turn for the worse.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
explaining What was the effect of the Vietnam War being a "television war'?
disproportionate being out of proportion; lacking in proper relation
1968: The Pivotal Year
guiding QUESTION Why was 1968 considered the most turbulent year of the 1960s?
dove a person in favor of the United States withdrawing from the Vietnam War
The most turbulent year of the chaotic 1960s was 1968. The year saw a shocking political announcement, two traumatic assassinations, and a political convention held amid strident antiwar demonstrations. First, however, the United States endured a surprise attack in Vietnam.
hawk someonewho believed the United States should continue its military efforts in Vietnam
Antiwar demonstrators protest in New York City in 1969.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Information What can you learn about war protesters from this photograph? TheTet Offensive
On January 30, 1968, during Tet, the Vietnamese New Year, the Vietcong and North Vietnamese launched a massive surprise attack. In what was called the Tet Offensive, guerrilla fighters attacked most American airbases in Soutl Vietnam and most of the South’s major cities. Vietcong even blasted their way into the American embassy in Saigon.
After about a month of fighting, U.S. and South Vietnamese soldiers repelled the enemy troops, inflicting heavy losses on them. But less tangibh damage had been done. The American people were shocked that an enemy supposedly on the verge of defeat could launch such a large-scale attack. The media openly criticized the war. “The American people should be getting ready to accept, if they haven’t already, the prospect that the whole Vietnan effort may be doomed,” declared the Wall Street Journal. Television newscast' Walter Cronkite said that it seemed “more certain than ever that the blood experience in Vietnam is to end in a stalemate.”
SlOPfflcMlRW,
Vietnam now9
Johnson Leaves the Race
Both Johnson and the war had become increasingly unpopuk With the presidential election of 1968 on the horizon, some Democratic politicians made surprising moves. In November 1967, Eugene McCarthy—a little-known liberal senator from Minnesota declared that he would challenge Johnson for th< Democratic presidential nomination. At first, his candidacy was mostly dismissed, but he attracted support from those who opposed the war. In March 1968, McCarthy made a str< showing in the New Hampshire primary, winning more than 40 percent of the vote. Realizing that Johnson was vulnerable, Senator Robert Kennedy, who also opposed the war, quickly entered the race for the Democratic nomination.
With both the country and his own party deeply divided, Jo nson appeared on television on March 31, 1968. He announc ave concluded that I should not permit the presidency to ’ +nme inv°lve(d in the partisan divisions that are developii in this political year. Accordingly, I shall not seek, and I wil
no accept, t e nomination of my party for another term as your President.
A
Season of Violence More shocking events followed Johnsons announcement. On April 4, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., was assassinated in Memphis by James Earl Ray. On June 5, Robert Kennedy, who appeared likely to win the Democratic nomination, was gunned down by Sirhan Sirhan, an Arab nationalist.
The violence that seemed to plague the country in 1968 culminated with a chaotic and well-publicized clash between antiwar protesters and police at the Democratic National Convention in Chicago. Thousands of young activists surrounded the convention center to protest the war. Despite these protests, the delegates selected Vice
Protests at the Democratic National Convention in 1968 were nationally televised.
CRITICAL THINKING
President Hubert Humphrey as the Democratic nominee.
Meanwhile, in a park not far from the convention hall, protesters and police began fighting. Demonstrators taunted police with the chant “The whole world is watching!” as the officers tried to force them to disperse. Violence between protesters and police aired on national television.
o
Nixon Wins the Presidency
At a much more sedate convention, Republicans selected former vice president and 1960 presidential hopeful Richard Nixon as their candidate. A third candidate, Governor George Wallace of Alabama, decided to run in 1968 as an independent. An outspoken segregationist, Wallace sought to attract Americans who felt threatened by the civil rights movement and urban social unrest.
Public opinion polls gave Nixon a wide lead over Humphrey and Wallace. Nixons campaign promise to unify the nation and restore law and order appealed to Americans who feared their country was spinning out of control. He claimed to represent a silent majority of Americans who sought to maintain law and order but had been overshadowed in recent years by social and political turmoil. He promised that he had a “secret plan” to bring “peace with honor” in Vietnam.
Humphrey’s campaign faced significant challenges, but by October 1968, his increasingly antiwar stance and strong campaigning helped turn his numbers around. A week before the election, President Johnson announced that the bombing of North Vietnam had halted and that a cease-fire would follow. These boosts came too late for Humphrey, however. Nixon defeated him by more than 100 electoral votes, although he only won the popular vote by a slim margin of 43 percent to 42 percent.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Drawing Conclusions How might the protests at the convention have affected voters'opinions of Democrats?
SKILLS PRACTICE_____________
Look at the protest signs in the pictures in this lesson. Look for words you know on the signs.
Think about what the words mean.
Evaluating Why was the Tet Offensive a turning point in the Vietnam War?
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Defining What was the credibility gap? 8F
2.	Contrast How did doves and hawks differ? 8E,8F
Using Your Notes
3.	Summarizing Use the notes you completed during the lesson to write a paragraph that summarizes the reasons that many people opposed the Vietnam War. 8E.8F
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Identifying Why did Americans disagree about the Vietnam War?
5.	Describing Why was 1968 considered the most turbulent year of the 1960s? 8E.8F
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Suppose that you were living in 1968. Write an article for a student newspaper in which you present opposing views about the Vietnam War. 8E.8F The Vietnam War 509
networks
There's More Online!

C V
A
BIOGRAPHY
Henry Kissinger &T BIOGRAPHY Maya Lin gf GRAPHIC NOVEL May Day gf PRIMARY SOURCE Excerpts from New York Times v. United States
sf VIDEO The Fall of Saigon
gf INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
LESSON 3
The War Winds Down
military conflict divide people
the government during irartii
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
It Matters Because
Shortly after taking office, President Nixon moved to end the nation's involvement in Vietnam. The final years of the confh yielded more bloodshed and turmoil, as well as growing cynitis
generation
unresolved
Content Vocabulary
•	linkage
•	Vietnamization
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read, use the following graphic organizer to list the steps that President Nixon took to end American involvement in Vietnam.
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 

8D explain reasons and outcomes for U.S. involvement in foreign countries and their relationship to the Domino Theory, including the Vietnam War
8E analyze the major issues and events of the Vietnam War such as the Tet Offensive, the escalation of forces, Vietnamization, and the fall of Saigon
continued on the next page
Nixon Moves to End the War
guiding question Whatpolides did Nixon employ to end the war?
As a step toward ending the war, Nixon appointed Henry Kissingei as special assistant for national security affairs. Kissinger embarkei upon a policy called linkage, or improving relations with the Sovi< Union and China, to try to persuade them to reduce their aid to North Vietnam. In August 1969, Kissinger also entered into secret negotiations with North Vietnam’s representative, he Due Tho.
Meanwhile, Nixon began Vietnamization. Th is process involv the gradual withdrawal of U.S. troops while the South Vietnamese assumed more of the fighting. He announced the withdrawal of 25,000 soldiers on June 8, 1969. At the same time, however, Nixon increased air strikes against North Vietnam and began secretly bombing Vietcong sanctuaries in neighboring Cambodia.
Turmoil at Home Continues
In late 1969, Americans learned that in the spring of 1968 an American platoon under the command of Lieutenant William Calley had massacred unarmed South Vietnamese civilians in the hamlet of My Lai. Most of the victims were old men, women, and children. Calley eventually went to prison for his role in the killings. Jan Barry, a founder of the Vietnam Veterans Against the War, viewed My Lai <. a symbol of the dilemma his generation faced in the conflict:
PRIMARY SOURCE
“To kill on military orders and be a criminal, or to refuse to kill and be a criminal is the me agony of Americas Vietnam war generation. It is what has forced upward of sixty thousand young Americans, draft resisters and deserters, to Canada, and created one hundred thousa military deserters a year... .**
quoted in Who Spoke Up?: American Protest Against the War in Vietnam, 1963-T97S,
510
The U.S. invasion of Cambodia led to mass protests and to the tragic killing of four students by National Guard troops at Kent State University in May 1970.
In April 1970, Nixon announced that American troops had invaded Cambodia to destroy Vietcong bases there. Many believed this invasion expanded the war, which set off many protests. On May 4,
Ohio National Guard soldiers armed with tear gas and rifles fired on demonstrators at Kent State University, killing four students. Days later, police killed two student demonstrators at Jackson State College in Mississippi.
An angry Congress began to work to end the president’s control of the war. In December 1970, it repealed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, which had given the president nearly complete power in directing the conflict.
The following year, a former employee of the Department of Defense, Daniel Ellsberg, leaked what became known as the Pentagon Papers to
the New York Times. The documents contained details about decisions to expand the war, and confirmed what many Americans had long believed: the government had not been honest with them.
The United States Pulls Out
Americans were increasingly ready for the war to end as the presidential election of 1972 approached. Nixon faced Democratic challenger George McGovern, an outspoken critic of the war. Less than a month before the election, however, Kissinger emerged from his secret talks with Le Due Tho to announce that “peace is at hand.” Nixon soundly defeated McGovern.
Soon, Kissinger’s peace negotiations broke down over disagreements about the presence of North Vietnamese troops in the South. In December 1972, to force North Vietnam to resume negotiations, the Nixon administration began the most destructive air raids of the war. In what became known as the “Christmas bombings,” American B-52s dropped thousands of tons of bombs on North Vietnamese targets for 11 straight days. Then negotiations resumed. On January 27, 1973, the warring sides signed an agreement “ending the war and restoring the peace in Vietnam.” The United States promised to withdraw its troops, and both sides agreed to exchange prisoners of war. After almost eight years of war, the nation ended its direct involvement in Vietnam.
The Domino Effect
Peace did not last. In January 1975, Cambodia fell under the control of the Communist group the Khmer Rouge. In March 1975, the North Vietnamese army invaded South Vietnam. Nixon had resigned in August 1974 following Watergate, a scandal that broke as the war was winding down. When the new president, Gerald Ford, asked for funds to aid the South Vietnamese, Congress refused. On April 30, the North Vietnamese captured Saigon,
South Vietnam’s capital. They then renamed the city Ho Chi Minh City.
Laos, another country in the region, was also greatly affected by the Vietnam War. Though Laos was run by a neutral coalition government during most of the war, the constant effects of bombings on the parts of the Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos destabilized that neutrality. Communists took over in Laos after the fall of Saigon. Thus, the domino effect played out as predicted.
B reading progress check
Sequencing How did the "Christmas bombings" help to put an end to U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War?
CRITICAL THINKING
Determining Cause and Effect How did the invasion of Cambodia lead to the shootings at Kent State University?
linkage policy of improving relations with the Soviet Union and China in hopes of persuading them to cut back their aid to North Vietnam
Vietnamization the process of making South Vietnam assume more of the war effort by slowly withdrawing American troops from Vietnam
generation a group of individuals who were born and who live during the same period of time
(continued from p. 510)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 8F describe the responses to the Vietnam War such as the draft, the 26th Amendment, the role of the media, the credibility gap, the silent majority, and the anti-war movement
20A describe the impact of events such as the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution and the War Powers Act on the relationship between the legislative and executive branches of government
The Vietnam War 511
The Legacy of Vietnam
GUIDING QUESTION
1,1. previous international conflicts?
“The lessons of the past in Vietnam,” President Ford declared in 1975, “have already been learned-learned by Presidents, learned by Congress, learned by the American people—and we should have our focus on the future.” Vietnam had a profound effect on America.
The War's Human Toll
America paid a heavy price for its involvement in Vietnam, far more than the estimated $173 billion in direct costs. Approximately 58,000 young Americans died, and some 300,000 were injured. An estimated 1 million North Vietnamese and South Vietnamese soldiers died, as did millions more civilians. Back home, some soldiers had trouble readjusting. Army Specialist Doug Johnson recalled:
PRIMARYSOURCE
« It took a while for me to recognize that I did suffer some psychological problems in trying to deal witl my experience in Vietnam.... One evening... I went to see a movie on post. I don't recall... what it was about, but I remember there was a sad part, and that I started crying uncontrollably. It hadn't dawned on me before this episode that I had... succeeded in burying my emotions.**
—quoted in Touched by the Dragon, 195
Because many people considered the war a defeat and wanted to put it behind them, the veterans’ sacrifices often went unrecognized. They received relatively few welcome-home parades and celebrations.
liiiiiii ANALYZING SUPREME COURT CASES
NEW YORK TIMES
v. UNITED STATES,
1971 Background to the Case
In 1971 Daniel Ellsberg leaked classified documents, known as the Pentagon Papers, to the New York Times and the Washington Post. When the newspapers attempted to publish these documents, the Nixon administration argued that publication would threaten national security. The case centered on the First Amendment guarantee of a free press.
How the Court Ruled
Daniel Ellsberg leaked the classified documents known as the Pentagon Papers. The New York Times went to court to battle for its right to print the Pentagon Papers.
In a 6-to-3 per curiam opinion—per curiam meaning that the decision was issued by the whole Court and not specific justices—the Court found that the Nixon administration had failed to prove that publication of the Pentagon Papers would imperil the nation in any way. The New York Times and the Washington Post could publish the Pentagon Papers.
DBQ
Analyzing Historical Documents Q
Drawing Conclusions Why do you think Daniel Ellsberg leaked the Pentagon Papers to the press? © Defending Do you think the government can ever justify media censorship, even based on national security concerns?
.. . ........................................
512
The war remained unresolved for the American families whose relatives and friends were classified as prisoners of war (POWs) or missing in action (MIA). Despite many official investigations, these families were not convinced that the government had told the truth about POW/MIA policies.
Vietnam remained on the nations mind nearly a decade later. In 1982 the nation dedicated the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C., a large black granite wall inscribed with the names of those killed and missing in action in the war.
The War's Impact on the Nation
The war also left a mark on national politics. In 1973 Congress passed the War Powers Act as a way to reestablish some limits on executive power. The act required the president to inform Congress of any commitment of troops abroad within 48 hours, and to withdraw them in 60 to 90 days, unless Congress explicitly approved the troop commitment. No president has recognized this limitation, however, and the courts have tended to avoid the issue.
Nonetheless, every president since the law’s passage has asked Congress to authorize the use of military force before committing ground troops to combat. In general, the war shook the nation’s confidence and made some begin to question American foreign policies.
On the domestic front, the Vietnam War increased Americans’ cynicism about their government. Together with Watergate, Vietnam made many Americans feel that the nation’s leaders had misled them.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
Assessing How did the American public treat returning Vietnam veterans?
The Vietnam Veterans Memorial is inscribed with the names of the more than 58,000 people killed or missing in Vietnam.
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Generalizations How does the Vietnam Veterans Memorial symbolize U.S. involvement in the war? unresolved not cleared up; not dealt with successfully
SKILLS PRACTICE
Make a speech to your class giving your opinion about the Vietnam War. As you prepare the speech, make a list of the academic vocabulary words and content vocabulary words used in this chapter. Use at least eight of these words in the speech.
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Defining What was Vietnamization? 8E
2.	Explaining Whatwasthe goal ofthe linkage policy? 8E
Using Your Notes
3.	Assessing Use the notes you completed during the lesson to write a short essay assessing the effectiveness of the various strategies Nixon pursued in Vietnam. 8D.8E
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Identifying What policies did Nixon employ to end the war?
8D, 8E
5.	Contrasting How was the political and cultural aftermath of the
Vietnam War different from previous international conflicts?
8D, 8E, or, 20A
Writing Activity
NARRATIVE
Suppose you are a college student in 1970. Write a journal entry expressing your thoughts and feelings about the events at Kent State University and Jackson State College. 8F The Vietnam War 513
cha?ts817 Assessment
Directions: On a separate sheet of paper, answer the questions below. Make sure you read carefully and answer all parts of the questions.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Identifying Long Range Causes Who controlled Vietnam prior to 1954, and how did this affect the coming ofthe Vietnam War? 8D,8E
0 Explaining Explain the difference between the two groups in Vietnam—North Vietnam under Ho Chi Minh and South Vietnam under Ngo Dinh Diem. 8D, 8E
0 Speculating What might you speculate about South Vietnam's leader Ngo Dinh Diem's decision to not hold national elections because of his fear that North Vietnam's Ho Chi Minh would win? 8D, 8E
0 Describing WhatwastheVietcong? Why wasits influence significant to what President Eisenhower was trying to do near the beginning of U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War?
0 Explaining What military tactics did the Vietminh use in Vietnam? 8D.8E
0 Identifying Cause and Effect How did the Gulf of Tonkin incident and the subsequent congressional resolution contribute to U.S. involvement in Vietnam? 8D, 8E
0 Describing What was the Ho Chi Minh Trail, and what was its importance in the Vietnam War? 8E
Lesson 2
0 Describing What were the "teach-ins," and what
viewpoints were represented among war protestors?
8D, 8F
0 Specifying What tactics did some Americans use to avoid the draft? 8D,8F
0 Identifying Perspectives Why did many Americans question the fairness ofthe military draft during the Vietnam War? 8D, 8F
0 Identifying Cause and Effect What political rights were conferred by the Twenty-sixth Amendment? Explain why this amendment was introduced, and how it expanded the rights of certain people to participate in the democratic process. 21B, 23A, 23B
© Analyzing In what way did the Vietnam War shape the American presidential election in 1968? 8D, 8F
Lesson 3
© Analyzing What was Vietnamization? What was its purpose? 8E
© Understanding Relationships What was the effect of the "Christmas bombings" of 1972 on the peace negotiations? 8D.8E, 8F
© Identifying Cause and Effect What news triggered additional protests against the war including the Kent State University demonstration, which resulted in four student deaths? 8D, 8E, 8F
© Identifying Cause and Effect How did the Pentagon
Papers increase support for the antiwar movement?
8D, 8E, 8F
Exploring the Essential Questions
© Analyzing Why did the Vietnam War trigger such a massive anti-war movement compared to other American wars? Be sure to include the credibility gap and the issue of escalation in your answer. 8F
Critical Thinking
0 Drawing Conclusions Explain the domino theory and how it contributed to the political decision to become involved in the Vietnam War. 8D
Need Extra Help?
10 11 12 13
15	16	17	18
| Goto page	| 500 | 500 | 502 | 502 | 501 | 503 | 505 | 506 | 507 | 507 |
514
© Identifying Central Issues Even though the United States initially supported Diem and South Vietnam, why did the United States support a military coup against Diem in 1963? 8D.8E
® Evaluating Why did President Johnson want to avoid directly attacking North Vietnam, and how did U.S. military tactics create a different type of war? 8D, 8E
® Identifying Cause and Effect Why did the Gulf of Tonkin Incident lead to the War Powers Act? Describe how the act affected presidential power and changed the relationship between the legislature and the executive branches of government. 20A
0 Finding the Main Idea What was decided in the Supreme Court case Tinker v. Des MoinesT 21A
$ Analyzing Explain the reasons why the United States was unable to achieve its goals in Vietnam. 8D
(J) Describing How did media coverage of the Vietnam War lead to a Supreme Court case about the First Amendment? What were the issues of the case? 8F, 21A
Social Studies Skills
Q
Sequencing Create a time line that identifies the key events and dates ofthe Vietnam War, including events that helped to cause the war, events that shaped the American role in South Vietnam, and events that shaped the outcome ofthe war, leading up to, during, and after the Vietnam War. 2C,8E Preparing a Speech Should citizens support the government during wartime? Take a point of view on this issue and write a short speech explaining your opinion. Support your point of view with historical ®vWence.
© Comparing and Contrasting Explain the difference between Johnson's and Nixon's attitudes toward attacking Cambodia. 8D.8E
Analyzing Primary Sources
Read the excerpt below, and then answer the questions that follow.
PRIMARYSOURCE
I read a lot of pacifist literature to determine whether or not I was a conscientious objector. I finally concluded that I wasn't.... The one clear decision I made in 1968 about me and the war was that if I was going to get out of it, I was going to get out in a legal way. I was not going to defraud the system in order to beat the system. I wasn't going to leave the country, because the odds of coming back looked real slim.... With all my terror of going into the Army... there was something seductive about it, too. I was seduced by World War II and John Wayne movies.... I had been, as we all were, victimized by a romantic, truly uninformed view of war.99
—Nam: The Vietnam Warm the Words of the Men and Women Who Fought There, 1981
© Evaluating Explain how you could use corroboration to evaluate the validity of this source as a good example of the experiences of Vietnam veterans. 29E
Drawing Conclusions What does this source tell you about the role ofthe media before Vietnam? How did the way Americans remembered World War II shape the soldier's frame of reference and help him overcome his fear of being drafted? 8F.29E
Need Extra Help?
Gotopage | 502 | 502 | 503 | 507 | 497 | 512 | 498 | 497 | 497 | 515 | 515
The Vietnam War 515
Analyzing Visuals
Use the map below to answer the questions that follow.
© Posing Questions About Geographic Distributions
What questions do you need to ask to be able to explain why South Vietnam was strategically important to the United States military? 8D, 31B
© Identifying Cause and Effect Using this map as well as what you have learned in the chapter, explain the reasons the United States government decided to support France and get involved in Vietnam. 8D, 31B
Extended Response Questions
© Analyzing The conflict in Vietnam has been called the first "television war." Write a brief essay describing how television changed the way Americans viewed war in the 1960s, and how media coverage affected the nation's response to the war in Vietnam. Your essay should have an
introduction, at least two paragraphs, and a conclusion.
8F
Need Extra Help?
	30	31	32	33	34	35
| Go to page	|51«	|516|		|504j	501 ;	| 508 I
® Summarizing Either online, or at the library, research details ofthe events that led to Roy Benavidez winning Medal of Honor. Write a brief newspaper article summarizing his story, and identifying the most remarkable elements of his heroism and character. 26
Standardized Test Practice
What event led to the French decision to withdraw from Vietnam? 8E
A.
The American decision to stop sending aid. B.
Ho Chi Minh's return from exile. C.
The overthrow of Ngo Dinh Diem. D.
The battle of Dien Bien Phu. © Why was the Tet Offensive significant? 8E
F.
It was a major victory for the Vietcong. G.
It convinced many Americans the war could not be won. H.
It led to the U.S. withdrawal from South Vietnam J. It led to the start of the antiwar movement. 516
The Politics of Protest
1960-1980
networks
There's More Online about the United States and the politics of protest.
