CHAPTER 16
Place andTime: United States 1954-1968
Rosa Parks made a decision in December 1955 that ignited a movement to end segregation and achieve civil liberties for all Americans. A young pastor by the name of Martin Luther King, Jr., spearheaded efforts to reach these goals. By the mid-1960s, civil rights activists had gained two important pieces of legislation: the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
Step Into the Place
Read the quotes and look at the information presented on the map. SS3 9A, 9b, 9C, 9G, 29a, 29E, 29F
Analyzing Historical Documents Daisy Bates and Orval Faubus both describe the situation in Little Rock, Arkansas, in 1957. How do the two quotes reflect different perspectives?
PRIMARY SOURCE
6< Suddenly I realized that this calm I had so taken for granted was only
the calm before the storm, that this was war, and that as State President of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People I was in the front-line trenches. Was I ready for war?... Who was I really and what did I stand for?... [M]y mind ranged over these questions and over the whole course of my life. Toward dawn I knew I had found the answer. ,»
I was ready. I drifted off into the sleep of a mind no longer torn by doubt	i
or indecision.”	'
—Daisy Bates, from The Long Shadow of Little Rock: A Memoir, 1962
PRIMARY SOURCE
66Malice, envy, hate is deplorable, in any place or in any circumstances, but as President Eisenhower has said himself, you can't change the hearts of people by law. Now, in view of the progress that we have made, all I ask for in this situation, and all I've ever asked for, is some time for the situation to change for it to become acceptable, so that there would not be disorder and violence.... So, why should we be so impatient as to want to force it, because force begets force, hate begets hate, malice begets malice. But, if time was given for an adjustment of the attitudes and the feelings of people, then it can be peacefully accomplished, which would be better for all concerned.”
—Orval Faubus, from an interview with news commentator Mike Wallace, September 15,1957
Step Into the Time
September 1957
Making Connections
Research an individual featured on the time line. Write a
Eisenhower May 17,1954 Brown v. Board of 1953-1961 Education ruling is issued
December 1955 Montgomery, Alabama, bus boycott begins
Eisenhower sends federal
1960
troops to ensure integration of a Little Rock high school
sit-in b



networks
There's More Online!
r-S MAP Explore the
L-I intprartiwo unrein.
interactive version of this map on Networks.
400 miles J
0	400 km
Lambert Azimuthal Equal-Area projection
Kennedy
1961-1963
L.
Johnson 1963-1969
August 28,1963 The
March on Washington, D.C., is held to support the civil rights bill
July 1964 Civil
Rights Act of 1964 August 1965 Voting passes	Rights Act passes
April 4,1968 Martin Luther King, Jr., is assassinated
April 11,1968 Civil Rights Act of 1968 is passed
t

' •	r .
'»5
networks
There's More Online!

BIOGRAPHY
Martin Luther King, Jr. Sf BIOGRAPHY Thurgood Marshall
sf BIOGRAPHY Rosa Parks
gf BIOGRAPHY Linda Brown Thompson
Ef IMAGE Montgomery Bus Boycott
Bf PRIMARYSOURCE Excerpts from the Brown v. Board of Education Supreme Court Ruling
sf VIDEO Civil Rights
INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
Ir’ >

Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
facility
Content Vocabulary
•	"separate but equal"
•	de facto segregation
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read, complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below by listing the techniques used to challenge segregation.
__ Civil Rights
Movement


TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 9A trace the historical development of the civil rights movement in the 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries, including the 13th, 14th, 15th, and 19th amendments
9B describe the roles of political organizations that promoted civil rights, including ones from African American, Chicano, American Indian, women’s, and other civil rights movements
9C identify the roles of significant leaders who supported various rights movements, including Martin Luther King Jr., Cesar Chavez, Rosa Parks, Hector P. Garcia, and Betty Friedan
continued on the next page

2g / •%.	<3?
LESSON 1
The Movement Begins
youthinkthecivilrightsmovement otivatesasocietytomakediang
It Matters Because
After World War II, African Americans and other civil rights supporters challenged segregation in the United States. Their efforts were strongly opposed by Southern segregationists. Eventually, the federal government begar to take a firmer stand for civil rights.
The Origins of the Movement
guidingquestion What techniques did the civil rights movement useto challenge segregatioi
On December 1, 1955, Rosa Parks left her job as a seamstress in Montgomery, Alabama, and boarded a bus to go home. In 1955, buses in Montgomery reserved seats in the front for whites and seats in the rear for African Americans. Seats in the middle were available to African Americans only if there were few whites on the bus. Parks took a seat just behind the white section, and soon all ol the seats on the bus were filled. When the driver noticed a white man standing, he told Parks and three other African Americans in her row to get up so the white man could sit down. When Parks did not move, the driver called the police.
News of Parks’s arrest reached the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), which asked Parks whether her case could be used to challenge segregation. Parks replied, “If you think it will mean something to Montgomery and do some good, I’ll be happy to go along with it.”
Parks’s decision would spark a new era in the civil rights movement. The struggle would not be easy. In 1896 the Supreme Court had declared segregation to be constitutional in Plessy v. Ferguson, which established the "separate but equal" doctrine. Laws that segregated African Americans were permitted as long as equal facilities were provided. The facilities provided for Africa Americans, however, were usually of poorer quality than those provided for whites. Areas without laws requiring segregation often had de facto segregation—segregation by custom and tradition.
472
Court Challenges Begin
Aw'^pp ^movement had been building for a long time. Since 1909, 6	a supported court cases aimed at overturning segregation.
Over the years, the NAACP had achieved some victories. In 1935, for example,
the Supreme Court ruled in Norris v. Alabama that exclusion of African Americans from juries violated their rights to equal protection under the law.
New Political Power
African Americans also enjoyed increased political power. Northern politicians increasingly sought their votes and listened to their concerns. During the 1930s, many African Americans benefited from New Deal programs and began supporting the Democratic Party. This gave the party new strength in the North. The northern wing of the party was now able to counter Southern Democrats, who often supported segregation.
The Push for Desegregation
During World War II, African American leaders began to use their political power to help end discrimination in wartime factories. They also increased opportunities for African Americans in the military.
In 1942 James Farmer and George Houser founded the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) in Chicago. CORE began using sit-ins, a form of protest first popularized by union workers in the 1930s, to desegregate restaurants that refused to serve African Americans. Using the sit-in strategy,
(continued from p. 472)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 9F describe presidential actions and congressional votes to address minority rights in the United States, including desegregation of the armed forces, the Civil Rights acts of 1957 and 1964, and the Voting Rights Act of 1965
continued on the next page
"separate but equal"
a doctrine established by the 1896 Supreme Court case Plessy v. Ferguson that permitted laws segregating African Americans as long as equal facilities were provided
facility something that is built, installed, or established to serve a particular purpose
de facto segregation
segregation by custom and tradition
iiiiiiii ANALYZING SUPREME COURT CASES
BROWN v. BOARD OF
EDUCATION (1954)
Background of the Case
One of the most important Supreme Court cases in American history began in 1952, when the Supreme Court agreed to hear the NAACP's case Brown v. Board ofEducation of Topeka, Kansas, and three other cases. They all dealt with the question of whether the principle "separate but equal," established in Plessy v. Ferguson, was constitutional with regard to public schools.
How the Court Ruled
In a unanimous decision in 1954, the Court ruled in favor of Linda Brown and the other plaintiffs. In doing so, it overruled Plessy v. Ferguson. It rejected the idea that equivalent but separate schools for African American and white students were constitutional. The Court held that racial segregation in public schools violated the Fourteenth Amendments equal protection clause. Chief Justice Earl Warren summed up the Courts decision, declaring:"[I]n the field of public education, the doctrine of 'separate but equal' has no place. Separate educational facilities are inherently unequal."The Court's rejection of "separate but equal" was a major victory for the civil rights movement. It led to the overturning of laws requiring segregation in other public places.
The children involved in the Brown v. Board of Education case are shown in this 1953 photograph. They are, from front to back, Vicki Henderson, Donald Henderson, Linda Brown (of the case title), James Emanuel, Nancy Todd, and Katherine Carper. Together, their cases led to the Supreme Court decision that public schools could not be segregated on the basis of race.
DBQ
Analyzing Historical Documents Q
Explaining Why did the Supreme Court find in favor of Linda Brown? Q
Examining Why was the ruling in Brown v. Board of Education so important? .....in...... . i. .......
The Civil Rights Movement 473
(continued from p. 473)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 9G describe the role of individuals such as governors George Wallace,
Orval Faubus, and Lester Maddox and groups, including the Congressional bloc of southern Democrats, that sought to maintain the status quo
91 describe how litigation such as the landmark cases of Brown v.
Board of Education, Mendez v. Westminster, Hernandez v. Texas, Delgado v. Bastrop I.S.D., Edgewood I.S.D. v. Kirby, and Sweatt v. Painter played a role in protecting the rights of the minority during the civil rights movement
members of CORE went to segregated restaurants. They sat down and refused to leave. The sit-ins were intended to shame managers into integrat their restaurants. CORE successfully integrated many public facilities in Northern cities, including Chicago, Detroit, Denver, and Syracuse.
Brown v. Board of Education
After World War II, the NAACP continued to challenge segregation in th courts. From 1939 to 1961, the NAACP’s chief counsel and director of its Legal Defense and Educational Fund was African American attorney Thurgood Marshall. After the war, Marshall focused his efforts on ending segregation in public schools.
In 1954 the Supreme Court decided to combine several cases and isst general ruling on segregation in schools. One of the cases involved a youi African American girl named Linda Brown, who was denied admission t< her neighborhood school in Topeka, Kansas, because of her race. She was told to attend an all-black school across town. With the help of the NAA( her parents sued the Topeka school board. On May 17, 1954, the Supremi Court ruled unanimously in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kans that segregation in public schools was unconstitutional.
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., used his position as a minister to preach his message of nonviolent resistance.
CRITICALTHINKING
Drawing Conclusions Why do you think Dr. King was effective in getting his message across?
Southern Resistance
The Brown decision marked a dramatic reversal of the precedent establisl in the Plessy v. Ferguson case in 1896. Brown v. Board of Education applies only to public schools, but the ruling threatened the entire system of segregation. Although it convinced many African Americans that the tirr had come to challenge segregation, it also angered many white Southerm Some became even more determined to defend segregation, regardless of what the Supreme Court ruled.
Although some school districts in the Upper South integrated their schools, anger and opposition was a far more common reaction. Senator Harry F. Byrd of Virginia called on Southerners to adopt “massive resistance” against the ruling. Across the South, hundreds of thousands c white Americans joined citizens’ councils to pressure their local governments and school boards into defying the Supreme Court. Many states adopted pupil assignment laws, which established elaborate requirements other than race that schools could use to prevent African Americans from attending white schools.
The Supreme Court inadvertently encouraged white resistance when followed up its decision in Brown v. Board of Education a year later. The Court ordered school districts to proceed “with all deliberate speed” to e school segregation. The wording was vague enough that many districts were able to keep their schools segregated for many more years.
Massive resistance also appeared in Congress. In 1956 a group of 101 Southern members of Congress signed the “Southern Manifesto.” It denounced the Supreme Court’s ruling as “a clear abuse of judicial power” and pledged to use “all lawful means” to *	reverse the decision. Not until 1969 did the
Supreme Court order all school systems to desegregate “at once” and operate integrated schools “now and hereafter.”
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Examining What two types of segregation were practiced in the Sc
7
The Civil Rights Movement Begins
guiding question Why was the Montgomery bus boycott successful?
In the midst of the uproar over the Brown v. Board of Education case, Rosa Parks made her decision to challenge segregation of public transportation. Jo Ann Robinson, head of a local group called the Womens Political Council, called on African Americans to boycott Montgomerys buses on the day Rosa Parks appeared in court. The boycott marked the start of a new era of the civil rights movement among African Americans.
The Montgomery Bus Boycott
The Montgomery bus boycott had a successful outcome.
Several African American leaders formed the Montgomery
Improvement Association to run the boycott and to negotiate with city leaders. They elected a 26-year-old pastor named Martin Luther King, Jr., to lead them.
Dr. King encouraged the people to continue their protest, but cautioned that the protest had to be peaceful:
PRIMARY SOURCE
African Americans walk to work during the third month of the Montgomery bus boycott.
CRITICAL THINKING
Determining Cause and Effect Consider the number of people you see walking in this photograph. Why do you think the bus boycott was effective?
« Now let us say that we are not advocating violence.... The only weapon that we have in our hands this evening is the weapon of protest.... If we were incarcerated behind the iron curtains of a communistic nation—we couldn't do this. If we were trapped in the dungeon of a totalitarian regime—we couldn't do this. But the great glory of American democracy is the right to protest for right. W
—quoted in Parting the Waters: America in the King Years, 1989
King had earned a Ph.D. in theology from Boston University. He believed that the only moral way to end segregation and racism was through nonviolent passive resistance. African Americans, he urged, must say to racists, “[W]e will soon wear you down by our capacity to suffer. And in winning our freedom we will so appeal to your heart and conscience that we will win you in the process.”
King’s powerful words stirred African Americans in Montgomery to continue their boycott for over a year. In November 1956, the Supreme Court declared Alabama’s laws requiring segregation on buses unconstitutional.
After the Court’s ruling, the Montgomery boycott was ended. Many other cities in the South, however, successfully resisted integrating their public transportation systems for years.
African American Churches
Martin Luther King, Jr., was not the only local minister in the bus boycott. Many of the other leaders were African American ministers. African American churches served as forums for protests and planning meetings and mobilized volunteers.
The Montgomery bus boycott had demonstrated that nonviolent protest could be successful. Dr. King, Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth of Birmingham, Alabama, and other African American ministers and civil rights activists established the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) in 1957. The SCLC set out to eliminate segregation and to encourage African Americans to register to vote. Dr. King served as the SCLC’s first president. The organization challenged segregation at voting booths and in public transportation, housing, and accommodations.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Drawing Conclusions How did the bus boycott create a mass movement for change?
The Civil Rights Movement 475
Eisenhower Responds
GUIDING QUESTION
How did President Eisenhower respond to the civil rights movement? President Eisenhower sympathized with the civil rights movement, yet he feared the possible effect of a court ruling overturning segregation. Following the precedent set by President Truman, he ordered navy shipyards and veterans’ hospitals to desegregate. At the same time, Eisenhower disagreed with using protests and court rulings. He believed segregation and racism would end gradually, as values changed. With the nation in the midst of the Cold War, he worried that challenging white Southerners might divide the nation. Publicly, he refused to endorse the Brown v. Board of Education decision, remarking, “I don’t believe you car change the hearts of men with laws or decisions.” Regardless, Eisenhowei knew he had to uphold the authority of the federal government. As a result, he became the first president since Reconstruction to send troops into the South to protect the rights of African Americans.
Arkansas governor Orval Faubus is shown holding up a paper arguing that the federal government was abusing its power by forcibly integrating Central High.
CRITICAL THINKING
Identifying Central Ideas Why did President Eisenhower send troops to Little Rock?
Crisis in Little Rock
In September 1957, the school board in Little Rock, Arkansas, was under federal court order requiring that nine African American students be admitted to Central High. The governor of Arkansas, Orval Faubus, was determined to win reelection. He began to campaign as a defender of wh:
supremacy. He ordered troops from the Arkansas National Guard to prevent the nine students from entering the school, the National Guard troops surrounded the school, an angry white mob gathered to intimidate students.
Faubus had used the armed forces of a state to oppose the federal government—the first such challenge to the Constitution since the Civil War. Eisenhower knew that he could not allow Faubus to defy the federal government. After a conference between Eisenhower and Faubus proved fruitless, the district court ordered the governor to remove the troops. Instead of ending the crisis, however, Faubus simply left the school to tl mob. After the African American students entered the building, angry whites beat at least two African American reporters and broke many windows.
The violence finally convinced President Eisenhower th he had to act. Federal authority had to be upheld. He immediately ordered the U.S. Army to send troops to Little
Rock and federalized the Arkansas National Guard. By nightfall, more th 1,000 soldiers of the 101st Airborne Division had arrived. By 5:00 a.m., tl troops had encircled the school, bayonets ready. A few hours later, the ni African American students arrived in an army station wagon and walked into the high school. Federal authority had been upheld, but the troops h to stay in Little Rock for the rest of the school year.
New Civil Rights Legislation
In the same year that the Little Rock crisis began, Congress passed the first civil rights law since Reconstruction. The Civil Rights Act of 1957 intended to protect the right of African Americans to vote. Eisenhower believed firmly in the right to vote, and he viewed it as his responsibilit to protect voting rights. He also knew that if he sent a civil rights bill tc Congress, conservative Southern Democrats would try to block the
476
In 1957 Elizabeth Eckford (left center) was one of the "Little Rock Nine/ those African American students determined to integrate Central High School in Little Rock.
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Inferences Why do you think the crowd is shouting at Elizabeth Eckford?
legislation. In 1956 he did send the bill to Congress, hoping not only to split the Democratic Party but also to convince more African Americans to vote Republican.
Several Southern senators did try to stop the Civil Rights Act of 1957. Senate majority leader Democrat Lyndon Johnson, however, put together a compromise that enabled the act to pass. Although its final form was much weaker than originally intended, the act still brought the power of the federal government into the civil rights debate. It created a Civil Rights Division within the Department of Justice and gave it the authority to seek court injunctions against anyone interfering with the right to vote.
It also created the United States Commission on Civil Rights to investigate
- any denial of voting rights. After the bill passed, the SCLC announced a § campaign to register 2 million new African American voters.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
O	--------------------------—
£ Explaining Why did Eisenhower intervene in the Little Rock controversy?
SKILLS PRACTICE
Was this lesson hard to read? Look back through the lesson at the pictures. What do you see? Use the pictures to help explain the lesson.
LESSON 1 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining Why was the struggle for civil rights more difficult because of the "separate but equal" doctrine established in the Plessy v. Ferguson case? 9A
Using Your Notes
2.	Explaining Use the notes you completed during the lesson to write a paragraph explaining the different tactics used during civil rights protests and why they were successful. 9A, 9B, 91
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Interpreting What techniques did the civil rights movement use to challenge segregation? 9A, 9B, 9C. 91
4.	Analyzing Why was the Montgomery bus boycott successful?
9A, 9B, 9C
5.	Summarizing How did President Eisenhower respond to the civil rights movement? 9A.9F
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Assume the role of an African American soldier returning from World War II. Write a letter to the editor of a newspaper describing your expectations of civil rights and why you should have those rights. 9A The Civil Rights Movement 477
VOCABULARY
The Civil Rights
Movement Although major figures of the civil rights movement such as Martin Luther King, Jr., are widely remembered today, the movement drew its strength from the dedication of grassroots supporters. In rural and urban areas across the South, ordinary individuals advanced the movement through their participation in marches, boycotts, and voter registration drives. Those who dared to make a stand against discrimination risked being fired from their job, evicted from their home, and becoming the target of physical violence.
PUBLIC TESTIMONY,
1964 “[M]y husband came, and said the plantation owner was raising cain because I had tried to register and before he quit talking the plantation owner came, and said, ‘Fannie Lou, do you know—did Pap tell you what I said?’
And I said, ‘Yes sir.’ He said, ‘I mean that... If you don’t go down and withdraw ... well—you might have to go because we are not ready for that.’...
And I addressed him and told him and said, ‘I didn’t try to register for you. I tried to register for myself.’
I had to leave that same night.
On the 10th of September, 1962,16 bullets were fired into the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Tucker for me. That same night two girls were shot in Ruleville, Mississippi. Also Mr. Joe McDonald’s house was shot in. And in June, the 9th, 1963,1 had attended a voter registration workshop, was returning back to Mississippi.... I stepped off the bus ... and somebody screamed ... ‘Get that one there,’ and when I went to get in the car, when the man told me I was under arrest, he kicked me.
I was carried to the county jail.... [The patrolmen] left my cell and it wasn’t too long before they came back. He said, ‘You are from Ruleville all right,’ and he used a curse word,
plantation
an agricultural estate worked by laborers
decent
agreeing with standards of proper behavior, good taste, or morality
testifying
making a statement based on personal knowledge or belief
canvassers
a person who asks for votes, contributions, or support to determine public opinion
adjoining
to sit next to or in contact with
incurable
unable to cure
he said ‘We are going to beat you until you wish you were dead.’
... All of this on account we want to register, become first-class citizens, and if the freedoi Democratic Party is not seated now, I questir America, is this America, the land of the free and the home of the brave where we havetc sleep with our telephones off the hooks because our lives be threatened daily becau we want to live as decent human beings, in America?”
—Fannie Lou Hamer testifying before 1 Credentials Committee of the Democrt
National Convention, August 22,15
STRATEGY MEMO, APRIL
1960 “The choice of the non-violent method, ‘the: in,’ symbolizes both judgment and promise. I a judgment upon middle-class conventional, half-way efforts to deal with radical social ev It is specifically a judgment upon contempor civil rights attempts. As one high school student from Chattanooga exclaimed, ‘We started because we were tired of waiting for you to act....’”
M.
Lawson, Jr., “From a Lun Counter Stool”, April 1960, Student Nonviol Coordinating Committee Pap 478

AUTOBIOGRAPHY, 1968
“All during the years, while the NAACP conducted a boycott of the downtown stores in Jackson, I had been one of [John] Salter’s most faithful canvassers and church speakers.
During the last week of school, he told me that sit-in demonstrations were about to start in Jackson and that he wanted me to be the spokesman for a team that would sit-in at Woolworth’s lunch counter.
... Seconds before 11:15 we were occupying three seats at the previously segregated Woolworth’s lunch counter. In the beginning the waitresses seemed to ignore us, as if they really didn’t know what was going on. Our waitress walked past us a couple of times before she noticed we had started to write our own orders down and realized we wanted service. She asked us what we wanted. We began to read to her from our order slips. She told us that we would be served at the back counter, which was for Negroes.
‘We would like to be served here,’ I said.
The waitress started to repeat what she had said, then stopped in the middle ofthe sentence. She turned the lights out behind the counter, and she and the other waitresses almost ran to the back ofthe store, deserting all their white customers. I
2223 Analyzing Historical Documents
1.	Comparing and Contrasting Compare and contrast the accounts of Fannie Lou Hamer and Anne Moody. What do they have in common? How do they differ? What do the similarities of their accounts help corroborate?
2.	Evaluating Validity Based on Context Based on prior knowledge you have about the civil rights movement, why would you tend to believe the account of events by Anne Moody?
3.	Acquiring Information Who does James Lawson indicate were the leaders of the sit-in movement? What explanation does he give for the start of the sit-in movement?
4.	Analyzing Historical Questions Combine the information from all three sources. Explain why segregation remained in place for so long in the American south? Who resisted change?
guess they thought that violence would start immediately after the whites at the counter realized what was going on....
At noon, students from a nearby white high school started pouring in to Woolworth’s.
When they first saw us they were sort of surprised.... [T]he white students started chanting all kinds of anti-Negro slogans. We were called a little bit of everything....
A man rushed forward, threw Memphis from his seat, and slapped my face. Then another man who worked in the store threw me against adjoining counter.... The mob started smearing us with ketchup, mustard, sugar, pies, and everything on the counter.... About ninety policemen were standing outside the store; they had been watching the whole thing through the windows, but had not come in to stop the mob or do anything....
After the sit-in, all I could think of was how sick Mississippi whites were.... Now I knew it was impossible for me to hate sickness. The whites had a disease, an incurable disease in its final stages. What were our chances against such a disease?”
—Anne Moody, Coming of Age in Mississippi
5.	Making Generalizations Martin Luther King, Jr., in his Letter from Birmingham Jail said that “segregation distorts the soul and damages the personality.” In her final paragraph, Moody states that “The whites had a disease, an incurable disease in its final stages.” What are King and Moody trying to say about how people behave when laws are unjust? Why might people act irrationally?
6.	Transferring Information Moody and Hamer use words to describe how people reacted to their civil rights activities. Take their descriptions, and your impressions of their experiences, and transfer them to a visual form. There are many historical photos from the civil rights movement available online. Locate appropriate images and use presentation software to show visually the kind of reactions African American civil rights protestors such as Moody and Hamer experienced.
479
IMAGE
Lunch Counter Sit-in E$ IMAGE
The March on Washington Ef PRIMARY SOURCE Excerpt from Coming of Age in Mississippi
networks
There's More Online!
Sf BIOGRAPHY James Meredith
Ef Chart/Graph Civil Rights Act and Voting Rights Act
LESSON 2
Challenging Segregation
TIMELINE
Key Events of the Civil Rights Movement Ef video Freedom Riders
INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
f doyouthinkthe civil rights movemeni
Mt k	M m/ifa sfism
It Matters Because
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary • register
In the early 1960s, the struggle for civil rights intensifiec African American citizens and white supporters created organizations that directed protests, targeted inequalit and attracted the attention of the mass media and the government.
Content Vocabulary • filibuster • cloture
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read about the struggle for civil rights, use the following graphic organizer to identify challenges to segregation in the South.
Challenge	Result
Sit-in Movement	
Freedom Riders	
Os

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 1B analyze and evaluate the application of these founding principles to historical events in U.S. history
9A trace the historical development of the civil rights movement in the 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries, including the 13th, 14th, 15th, and 19th amendments
The Sit-in Movement
guiding question	were the goals of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Commit
In the fall of 1959, four young African Americans—Joseph McN( Ezell Blair, Jr., David Richmond, and Franklin McCain—enrolled at North Carolina Agricultural and Technical College, an African American college in Greensboro. The four freshmen often talked about the civil rights movement. In January 1960, McNeil suggested a sit-in. “All of us were afraid,” Richmond later recalled. “But w< went and did it.”
On February 1, 1960, the four friends entered the nearby Woolworth’s department store. They purchased school supplies and then sat at the whites-only lunch counter and ordered coffee When they were refused service, Blair asked, “I beg your pardon, but you just served us at [the checkout] counter. Why can’t we be served at the counter here?” The students stayed at the counter unt it closed. They then stated that they would sit there daily until th< got the same service as white customers. They left the store excite McNeil recalled, “I just felt I had powers within me, a superhuma strength that would come forward.” McCain noted, “I probably fe better that day than I’ve ever felt in my life.”
News of the daring sit-in spread quickly. The following day,
29 African American students arrived at Woolworth’s determined t
9B describe the roles of political organizations that promoted civil rights, including ones from African American, Chicano, American Indian, women’s, and other civil rights movements
continued on the next page
sit at the counter until served. By the end of the week, more than 31 students were taking part. A new mass movement for civil right! had begun. Within two months, sit-ins had spread to 54 cities in ni states. They were staged at segregated stores, restaurants, hotels, an movie theaters. By 1961, sit-ins had been held in more than 100 cit.
480
The sit-in movement brought large numbers of idealistic and energized college students into the civil rights struggle. Many were discouraged by the slow pace of desegregation. Sit-ins offered them a way to dictate the pace of change.
At first, the leaders of the NAACP and the SCLC were nervous about the sit-in campaign. Those conducting sit-ins were heckled, punched, kicked, beaten with clubs, and burned with cigarettes, hot coffee, and acid. Most did not fight back.
Urged on by former NAACP official and SCLC executive director Ella Baker, students established the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) in 1960. African American college students from all across the South made up the majority of SNCC’s members. Many whites also joined.
SNCC became an important civil rights group.
Volunteer Robert Moses urged the SNCC to start helping rural Southern African Americans, who often faced violence if they tried to register to vote. Many SNCC volunteers, including Moses, bravely headed south as part of a voter education project. During a period of registration efforts in 1964 known as Freedom Summer, the Ku Klux Kian brutally murdered three SNCC workers with the complicity of local officials.
SNCC organizer and sharecropper Fannie Lou Hamer was evicted from her farm after registering to vote. Police arrested her in Mississippi as she was returning from a voter registration workshop in 1963. They beat her while she was in jail. She still went on to help organize the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party and challenged the legality of the state’s segregated Democratic Party at the 1964 national convention.
READING PROGRESS CHECK
register to file personal information in order to become eligible for an official event
Nonviolent protests, such as this pray-in in Albany, Georgia, in 1962, spread across the nation as the civil rights movement gained momentum.
CRITICALTHINKING
Drawing Conclusions What details in this photograph suggest that it was an effective form of protest? Making Inferences Why were SNCC organizers willing to put themselves at such personal risk?
The Freedom Riders
guidingquestion Howdid the Kennedy administration's Justice Department help the civil rights movement?
Despite rulings outlawing segregation in interstate bus service, bus travel remained segregated in much of the South. Alabama was one state in which many bus terminals were still segregated. Alabama’s governor, John Patterson, was known to be in favor of segregation. As attorney general of the state, he had banned the NAACP from being active in Alabama, and he had fought the bus boycotts.
In early May 1961, teams of African American and white volunteers who became known as Freedom Riders boarded several southbound interstate buses. Buses were met by angry white mobs in Anniston, Birmingham, and Montgomery, Alabama. The mobs slit bus tires and threw rocks at the windows. In Anniston, someone threw a firebomb into one bus. Fortunately, no one was killed.
In Birmingham, riders emerged from a bus to face a gang of young men armed with baseball bats, chains, and lead pipes. The gang beat the riders
| viciously. Birmingham public safety commissioner Theophilus Eugene 1 “Bull” Connor claimed that there had been no police at the bus station I because it was Mothers Day and he had given many officers the day off.
(continued from p. 480)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 9C identify the roles of significant leaders who supported various rights movements, including Martin Luther King Jr., Cesar Chavez,
Rosa Parks, Hector P. Garcia, and Betty Friedan
9E discuss the impact of the writings of Martin Luther King Jr. such as his “I Have a Dream” speech and “Letter from Birmingham Jail” on the civil rights movement
9F describe presidential actions and congressional votes to address minority rights in the United States, including desegregation ofthe armed forces, the Civil Rights acts of 1957 and 1964, and the Voting Rights Act of 1965
continued on the next page
The Civil Rights Movement 481
(continued from p. 481)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 9G describe the role of individuals such as governors George Wallace,
Orval Faubus, and Lester Maddox and groups, including the Congressional bloc of southern Democrats, that sought to maintain the status quo
9H evaluate changes and events in the United States that have resulted from the civil rights movement, including increased participation of minorities in the political process
continued on the next page
SKILLS PRACTICE
As you read about the events of the Civil Rights movement, look for connecting words such as by, and, but, because, before, after, with, and next. Make a chart and write down the sentences. Then write down what type of connection they show, for example: cause, comparison, or sequence.
A young protester in Birmingham, Alabama, is attacked by police dogs. Millions of Americans watched the graphic violence on televised nightly news.
► CRmCALTHBNKING Drawing Conclusions In what ways might these violent images have helped the civil rights movement?
FBI evidence later showed that Connor had told the local Kian to beat the rid< until “it looked like a bulldog got a hold of them.” The violence made national news, shocking many Americans and drawing the federal governments attention to the plight of African Americans in the South.
Kennedy and Civil Rights
While campaigning for the presidency in 1960, John F. Kennedy had promised to support civil rights. Civil rights leaders such as NAACP executive director Roy Wilkins urged Kennedy to support civil rights legislation after taking office. However, Kennedy knew he needed the support of Southern senators to get other programs through Congress and any new civil rights legislation would anger them.
Kennedy did, however, bring approximately 40 African Americans into high-level government positions. He appointed Thurgood Marshall to a federal judgeship on the Second Circuit Appeals Court in New York. Kennedy also created the Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity (CEEO). He allowed the Justice Department, run by his brother Robert, t< actively support the civil rights movement. The department tried to help African Americans register to vote by filing lawsuits across the South.
After the attacks on the Freedom Riders in Montgomery, both Kennedys publicly urged them to have a “cooling off” period. CORE leader James Farmer rejected the idea and announced that the riders would heac into Mississippi. To stop the violence, President Kennedy made a deal with Mississippi senator James Eastland. No violence occurred when buses arrived in Jackson, but Kennedy did not protest the riders’ arrests.
The cost of bailing the Freedom Riders out of jail used up most of CORE’S funds. When Thurgood Marshall learned of the situation, he offered Farmer the use of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund’s huge bail-boi account to keep the rides going. When President Kennedy found that th Freedom Riders were still active, he ordered the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) to tighten its regulations against segregated bus terminals. Robert Kennedy ordered the Justice Department to take lega action against Southern cities that maintained segregated bus terminals By late 1962, segregation in interstate bus travel had virtually ended.
Violence in Birmingh;
Martin Luther King, Jr., decided in the spring of 1 to launch demonstrations Birmingham, Alabama. H knew they would provoke violent response, but he believed it was the only w to get the president to actively support civil rights. Eight days after tl protests began, King was arrested. While in jail, he began writing the “Letter from Birmingham Jail.” It was an eloquent defense < nonviolent protest. In his letter, King argued that “there are two types of la
just and unjust . . . [and] one has a moral responsibility to disobey unjust laws. . . . Any law that uplifts human personality is just. Any law that degrades human personality is unjust. All segregation statutes are unjust because segregation distorts the soul and damages the personality.”
After King was released, the protests began to grow again. Public Safety Commissioner Connor responded with force. He ordered police to use clubs, police dogs, and high-pressure fire hoses on the demonstrators.
One powerful demonstration was called the Childrens March. On May 2, heroic young people marched in groups from churches to downtown businesses. Many were attacked by police, and many were arrested. On September 15, 1963, the Ku Klux Kian bombed Birmingham’s Sixteenth Street Baptist Church, killing four young girls. News reports of these attacks on children led to greater support for the civil rights movement.
g READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining Why do you think there was such a violent reaction to the civil rights movement?
The Civil Rights Act of 1964
guidingquestion How did the Civil Rights Act of 1964 allow the federal government to fight racial discrimination?
Events in Alabama grew more and more tragic. At his inauguration as Alabama’s governor, George Wallace had stated, “I draw a line in the dust . . . and I say, Segregation now! Segregation tomorrow! Segregation forever!” On June 11, 1963, federal marshals had to order Wallace to move from where he stood in front of the University of Alabama’s admissions office to block two African Americans from enrolling. The next day, a white segregationist murdered civil rights activist Medgar Evers in Mississippi. Evers had been the NAACP’s first field secretary, and had focused his efforts on voter registration and boycotts. His death made him a martyr of the civil rights movement. Amid these events, President Kennedy announced a civil rights bill.
The March on Washington
Civil rights leaders kept the pressure on legislators and the president by planning a large-scale march on Washington. On August 28, 1963, more than 250,000 demonstrators, African American and white, gathered near the Lincoln Memorial. They heard speeches and sang songs. Dr. King then delivered a powerful speech calling for freedom and equality for all Americans.
— Analyzing-----
PRIMARY SOURCES
“I Have A Dream” Speech
have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed: ‘We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal.’...
I have a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia, the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slave owners will be able to sit down together at the table of brotherhood.
I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character. M
—Martin Luther King, Jr., from the "Address in Washington,"August 28,1963
DBQ
ANALYZING PRIMARY
SOURCES
What is the dream King refers to in his speech? Martin Luther King, Jr., speaks to the assembled crowd in Washington, D.C.
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Inferences What details about the March on Washington encouraged more public support for the civil rights movement and put pressure on Congress to act on the civil rights bill? The Civil Rights Movement 483
(continued from p. 482)
TENS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 19B explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events, including World War I, the Great Depression, World War II, the 1960s, and 9/11
21B discuss historical reasons why the constitution has been amended
23A identify and analyze methods of expanding the right to participate in the democratic process, including lobbying, non violent protesting, litigation, and amendments to the U.S. Constitution
continued on the next page
1
h
(continued from p. 483)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 23B evaluate various means of achieving equality of political rights, including the 19th, 24th, and 26th amendments and congressional acts such as the American Indian Citizenship Act of 1924 26A explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities and political rights, including those for racial, ethnic, and religious minorities as well as women, in American society
filibuster an attempt to kill a bill by having a group of senators take turns speaking continuously so that a vote cannot take place
cloture a motion that ends debate and calls for an immediate vote
CHARTS/GRAPHS
The Bill Becomes Law
Kennedy tried and failed to win passage of civil rights legislation. After h assassination in November 1963, Lyndon Johnson—former leader of the Senate Democrats—became president. He had helped pass the Civil Right Acts of 1957 and 1960, but had done so by weakening their provisions an by compromising with other Southern senators.
Nevertheless, Johnson worked to get Kennedy’s civil rights legislatic through Congress. The bill passed the House of Representatives in February 1964. Then it stalled in the Senate for several weeks. Its opponents used a filibuster, a tactic in which senators speak continuously to preven vote. In June the Senate voted for cloture—to end debate and take a vote with a vote of 71 for and 29 against. The Senate then easily passed the bil On July 2, 1964, Johnson signed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 into law.
The Civil Rights Act of 1964 was the most comprehensive civil rights law Congress had ever enacted. The law made segregation illegal in most places of public accommodation, and it gave citizens of all races and nationalities eqw access to public facilities. The law gave the U.S. attorney general more power to bring lawsuits to force school desegregation and required private employers i end discrimination in the workplace. It also established the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) as a permanent federal agency.
The law also went further than simply banning discrimination based race. It also banned discrimination based on religion, gender, and nation origin. For religious minorities, for immigrants, and for women, the act represented a dramatic step forward in expanding their political rights ai economic opportunities as well.
The passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 immediately raised constitutional issues. The act banned racial discrimination in facilities ar businesses that served the general public. It specifically banned any type hotel, restaurant, theater, or entertainment venue from discrimination. Y was unclear whether the federal government had jurisdiction under the Constitution to regulate these businesses.
Article 1, section 8, gives Congress the power to regulate interstate commerce, but prior to 1964, hotels, restaurants, and theaters had been regulated by state governments, and few would have argued that they were engaged in interstate commerce. As a result, challenges to the law’s constitutionality began immediately. The owner of the Heart of Atlanta M<
MARCHING FOR FREEDOM, SELMA,
1965 Marchers in Selma, Alabama, hoped to build support for a new voting rights law.
1	Identifying Central Ideas How
did the Civil Rights Act of 1964 work to end segregation?
2	Drawing Conclusions Why do
you think counties where less than half of all adults were registered to vote were a focus of the Voting Rights Act of 1965?
The Civil Rights Act of 1964
•	Gave the federal government power to prevent racial discrimination and established the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC).
•	Made segregation illegal in most places of public accommodation.
•	Gave the U.S. attorney general more power to bring lawsuits to force school desegregation.
•	Required employers to end workplace discrimination.
The Voting Rights Act of 1965
•	Authorized the U.S. attorney general to sen federal examiners to register qualified vote
•	Suspended discriminatory devices, such as literacy tests, in counties where less than h of all adults were registered to vote.
484
refused to allow African Americans to stay at his hotel, and filed suit in federal court. The case rapidly advanced to the Supreme Court. In December 1964, in the case Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United States, the Supreme Court ruled that the interstate commerce clause did indeed give Congress the power to ban discrimination in facilities serving the public.
P READING PROGRESS CHECK
Assessing Did government support for civil rights come from the federal or state level?
The Struggle for Voting Rights
guidingquestion Why was the passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 a turning point in the civil rights movement?
Despite the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, voting rights remained an issue. The Twenty-fourth Amendment, ratified in 1964, helped somewhat. It eliminated poll taxes in
federal (but not state) elections. Convinced that a new law was needed to protect African American voting rights, Dr. King decided to hold another dramatic protest.
The Selma March
In December 1964, Dr. King received the Nobel Peace Prize in Oslo, Norway, for his work in the civil rights movement. A few weeks later, he announced, “We are not asking, we are demanding the ballot.”
In January 1965, the SCLC and Dr. King selected Selma, Alabama, as the focal point for their campaign for voting rights. Although African Americans made up a majority of Selma’s population, they made up only 3 percent of registered voters. To prevent African Americans from registering to vote, Sheriff Jim Clark had deputized and armed dozens of white citizens. His posse terrorized African Americans. On one occasion, they even used clubs and cattle prods on them. King’s demonstrations in Selma led to the arrest of more than 3,000 African Americans, including schoolchildren, by Sheriff Clark.
To keep pressure on the president and Congress to act, Dr. King joined with SNCC activists and organized a “march for freedom” from Selma to the state capitol in Montgomery, a distance of about 50 miles (80 km). On Sunday, March 7, 1965, the march began. The SCLC’s Hosea Williams and SNCC s John
President Johnson signs the Voting Rights Act into law on August 6,1965.
CRITICAL THINKING
Comparing and Contrasting How were the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 similar and different?
Lewis led some 600 protesters toward Montgomery.
As the protesters approached the Edmund Pettus Bridge, which led out
of Selma, Sheriff Clark ordered them to disperse. Many protesters were beaten in full view of television cameras. This brutal attack, known later as “Bloody Sunday,” left 70 marchers hospitalized and another 70 injured.
The nation was stunned as it viewed the shocking footage of law enforcement officers beating peaceful demonstrators. Watching the events
| from the White House, President Johnson became furious. Eight days later, j he appeared before a nationally televised joint session of Congress to £ propose a new voting rights law.
The Civil Rights Movement 485
The Voting Rights Act of 1965
On August 3, 1965, the House of Representatives passed the voting rights bill by a wide margin. The following day, the Senate also passed the bill. The Voting Rights Act of 1965 authorized the U.S. attorney general to sen federal examiners to register qualified voters, bypassing local officials whi often refused to register African Americans. The law also suspended discriminatory devices, such as literacy tests, in counties where less than half of all adults had been registered to vote.
The results were dramatic. By the end of the year, almost 250,000 African Americans had registered as new voters. The number of African American elected officials in the South also increased. In 1960, for examf no African American from the South held a seat in the U.S. Congress.
By 2011, there were 44 African American members of Congress.
The passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 marked a turning point the civil rights movement. The movement had now achieved two major legislative goals. Segregation had been outlawed, and new federal laws were in place to prevent discrimination and protect voting rights. After 1965, the movement began to shift its focus. It turned its attention to the problems of African Americans trapped in poverty and living in ghettos many of the nation’s major cities.
The Voting Rights Act of 1965, like the Civil Rights Act of 1964, immediately raised constitutional questions. Historically, each state had been allowed to set the rules regarding eligibility to vote. Article 1 sectio of the Constitution only specifies that each state has to use the same rule for choosing members of Congress as it uses for choosing members of it! state legislature. Article 2 section 1 specifies that each state gets to choos how to select the electors who vote for the president. By banning literacy tests, Congress was imposing a rule on voting, and it was unclear whethi this violated the rights of the states to set voting rules. In 1966, in Katzenbach v. Morgan, the Supreme Court ruled that the 14th Amendm< gave Congress the authority to ban literacy tests and impose voting rule; the state governments.
HREADING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing What was the positive outcome of the brutal response of police to rights protests?
Reviewing Vocabulary
1. Explaining How did opponents of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 use
4,
Analyzing How did the Kennedy administration's Justice Department help the civil rights movement? 9F, 26A
the filibuster to try to block its passage? 9A, 9G
Using Your Notes
2. Summarizing Use the notes you completed during the lesson on challenges to segregation to write a paragraph summarizing how the Freedom Riders helped the civil rights movement.
Answering the Guiding Questions
9A, 9B, 9C, 23A, 26A
3. Identifying What were the goals of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee? 9A, 9B, 9C, 23A, 26A
5
5. Interpreting How did the Civil Rights Act of 1964 allow th federal government to fight racial discrimination? 9F, 23B, 2
6.
6. Evaluating Why was the passage of the Voting Rights Act a turning point in the civil rights movement? 9F, 23B, 26A
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
Assume the role of a journ working for a college newspaper in 1960. Write an article ft newspaper describing the sit-in movement, including its participants, goals, and achievements. 9A, 9B, 9C, 23A, 26A 486
networks
There's More Online!
BIOGRAPHY
Stokely Carmichael Ef BIOGRAPHY Bobby Seale eT biography Malcolm X IMAGE
Black Power sf PRIMARY SOURCE Watts Riot Ef VIDEO Martin Luther King Ef interactive self-check
QUIZ
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
•	enforcement
Content Vocabulary
•	racism • black power
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read, use the following graphic organizer to list major violent events in the civil rights movement and their results.
Event	Result
	
	
	

Harlem:
July 18-20, 1964 I

/York

LESSON 3
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 2D explain the significance of the following years as turning points:
1898 (Spanish-American War), 1914-1918 (World War I), 1929 (the Great Depression begins), 1939-1945 (World War II), 1957 (Sputnik launch ignites U.S.-Soviet space race), 1968-1969 (Martin Luther King Jr. assassination and U.S. lands on the moon), 1991 (Cold War ends), 2001 (terrorist attacks on World Trade Center and the Pentagon), and 2008 (election of first black president, Barack Obama)
continued on the next page
ay w
Ft i
’W 5 »T
< ' 1

I I
«s 1\
fr
*•*.
Ik-S ~i T-r
New Civil Rights Issues
',"\r -
|!W
hi ,IH r  § I f I r i 1 < • 1 ij	®
;;■. h-'HHU
NS • Why do you think the civil rights movement 'America? • Whatmotivatesasodetytomakechanges?
it Matters Because
By the mid-1960s, much progress had been made in the area of civil rights. However, leaders of the movement began to understand that merely winning political rights for African Americans would not completely solve their economic problems. African American leaders would continue to try to end economic inequality.
Urban Problems
guiding question Why did riots break out in dozens of U.S. cities in the late 1960s?
Despite the passage of civil rights laws in the 1950s and 1960s, racism was still common in American society. Changing the law could not change peoples attitudes, nor did it end urban poverty.
In 1965 approximately 70 percent of African Americans lived in large cities. Even if African Americans had been allowed to move into white neighborhoods, many were stuck in low-paying jobs with little chance of advancement. In 1960 only 15 percent of African Americans held professional, managerial, or clerical jobs, compared to 44 percent of whites. The average income of African American families was only 55 percent of that of the average income for white families. Almost half of African Americans lived in poverty, with an unemployment rate typically twice that of whites.
Poor neighborhoods in the nations major cities were overcrowded and dirty, leading to higher rates of illness and infant mortality. Juvenile delinquency rates rose, as did the rate of young people dropping out of school. Complicating matters even more was a rise in the number of single-parent households.
The Watts Riot
Just five days after President Johnson signed the Voting Rights Act, a riot erupted in Watts, an African American neighborhood in Los Angeles. Allegations of police brutality served as the catalyst for this uprising. It lasted for six days and required more than 14,000 members of the National Guard and 1,500 law officers to restore
The Civil Rights Movement 487
racism prejudice or discrimination against a person because of his or her race
(continued from p. 487)
TOB
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 9A trace the historical development of the civil rights movement in the 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries, including the 13th, 14th, 15th, and 19th amendments 9B describe the roles of political organizations that promoted civil rights, including ones from African American, Chicano,
American Indian, women’s, and other civil rights movements
9C identify the roles of significant leaders who supported various rights movements, including Martin Luther King Jr., Cesar Chavez,
Rosa Parks, Hector P. Garcia, and Betty Friedan
9D compare and contrast the approach taken by some civil rights groups such as the Black Panthers with the nonviolent approach of Martin Luther King Jr.
26A explain actions taken by people to expand economic opportunities and political rights, including those for racial, ethnic, and religious minorities as well as women, in American society
order. Riots broke out in dozens of other American cities between 1964 anc 1968. In Detroit, burning, looting, and conflicts with police and the National Guard resulted in 43 deaths and more than 1,000 wounded in 1967. Property loss was estimated at almost $200 million.
The Kerner Commission
In the same year, President Johnson appointed the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders—headed by Governor Otto Kerner of Illinois—to study the causes of the urban riots and to make recommendations. The Kerner Commission, as it became known, blamed racism for most inner-city problems. “Our nation is moving toward two societies, one black, one white—separate and unequal,” it concluded. The commission recommended the creation of inner-city jobs and the construction of new public housing, but with the spending for the Vietnar War, Johnson never endorsed the recommendations of the commission. The Shift to Economic Rights
In the mid-1960s, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., decided to focus on the economic problems that African Americans faced. To call attention to deplorable housing conditions, Dr. King and his wife Coretta moved into a slum apartment in an African American neighborhood in Chicago. He and the SCLC hoped to improve the economic status of African Americans in poor neighborhoods.
The Chicago Movement, however, made little headway. When Dr. King led a march through the all-white suburb of Marquette Park to demonstrat the need for open housing, he was met by angry white mobs more hostile than those in Birmingham and Selma. Mayor Richard J. Daley met with Dr. King and discussed a new program to clean up the slums. Associations o realtors and bankers also agreed to promote open housing. In theory, mortgages and rental property would be available to everyone, regardless race. In practice, little changed.
H REAPING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying In what way did poverty contribute to the racial divide?
Frustration and anger led to rioting in seve African American communities during the
PLACES AND REGIONS
According to the map, riots were me. common in which part of the countr
THE WORLD IN SPATIAL
Tl According to the map, where was th location of the first riot?
Stokely Carmichael (1941-1998)
Stokely Carmichael was the founder of the 1960s Black Power movement. As a "Freedom Rider," he traveled to the South to ride on buses in protest of interstate transportation segregation laws. In 1964 Carmichael traveled to Alabama, where he organized an independent political party called the Lowndes County Freedom Organization. The organization's symbol was a black panther. In 1966 he first spoke of a new "Black Power" movement, which both promoted African American pride and advocated the necessity of self-defense in violent situations. Eventually, Carmichael relocated to Guinea, West Africa, where he changed his name to Kwame Ture. He died of cancer in Guinea in 1998.
Malcolm X (1925-1965)
Malcolm X was one of the most controversial black activists of the mid-twentieth century. He converted to the Nation of Islam while imprisoned in the 1940s. Paroled in 1952, he became an anti-white Muslim activist, calling himself "Malcolm X." Distancing himself from the Nation of Islam, he created his own group called the Organization of Afro-American Unity. During a pilgrimage, he began to rethink his social policies. He decided that white people were not inherently evil and that African Americans could enact change through traditional means. Malcolm X's new viewpoints drew harsh criticism from the Nation of Islam. On February 21,1965, three African American gunmen assassinated him.
Black Power
guidingquestion Why did many young African Americans join the black power movement?
Dr. King’s lack of progress in Chicago seemed to show that nonviolent protests could do little to solve economic problems. After 1965, many African Americans, especially urban young people, began to turn away from King. Some leaders called for more aggressive forms of protest. Some organizations, including CORE and SNCC, believed that African Americans alone should lead their struggle. Many young African Americans called for black power, a term that had many meanings. A few, including Robert F. Williams and H. Rap Brown, interpreted black power to mean that physical self-defense was acceptable.
To most, including Stokely Carmichael, the leader of SNCC in 1966, the term meant that African Americans should control the social, political, and economic direction of their struggle:
black power the mobilization of the political and economic power of African Americans, especially to compel respect for their rights and to improve their condition
PRIMARY SOURCE
MThis is the significance of black power as a slogan. For once, black people are going to use the words they want to use—not just the words whites want to hear.... The need for psychological equality is the reason why SNCC today believes that blacks must organize in the black community. Only black people can... create in the community an aroused and continuing black consciousness.
—from "What We Want," the New York Review of Books, September 1966
Black power stressed pride in the African American cultural group. It emphasized racial distinctiveness rather than adapting to the dominant culture. African Americans showed pride in their racial heritage by adopting new “Afro” hairstyles and African-style clothing. Many also took
The Civil Rights Movement 489
enforcement the act of
urging or carrying out by force
African names. Dr. King and some other leaders criticized black power as philosophy of hopelessness and despair.
Malcolm X
By the early 1960s, a young man named Malcolm X had become a symb of the black power movement. Born Malcolm Little in Omaha, Nebraska, experienced a difficult childhood and adolescence. In 1946 he was senttc prison for burglary. Prison transformed Malcolm. He educated himself ai played an active role in the prison debate society.
Eventually, he joined the Nation of Islam, commonly known as the Black Muslims. Despite the name, the Nation of Islam is very different fn mainstream Islam. The Nation of Islam preached black nationalism. Afte joining the Nation of Islam, Malcolm Little changed his name to Malcoln The X symbolized the family name of his enslaved African ancestors. He declared that his true name had been stolen from him by slavery, and he would no longer use the name white society had given him. Malcolm X’s criticisms of white society and the mainstream civil rights movement gained national attention for the Nation of Islam.
By 1964, Malcolm X had broken with the Black Muslims. Discouraged scandals involving the Nation of Islam’s leader, he went to the Muslim holy city of Makkah (Mecca) in Saudi Arabia. After seeing Muslims from mar races worshipping together, he no longer promoted separatism. After Male X broke with the Nation of Islam, he continued to criticize the organizati Because of this, organization members shot and killed him in February 1965.
Malcolm X’s speeches and ideas influenced a new generation of militant African American leaders who preached black power, black nationalism, and economic self-sufficiency. In 1966 in Oakland, Califorr Huey P. Newton and Bobby Seale organized the Black Panthers. Black Panther leaders called for an end to racial oppression and for control of major institutions in the African American community, such as schools, enforcement, housing, and hospitals.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Summarizing How did the black power movement lead African Americans av from Dr. King's message of nonviolent disobedience and the goal of integral
Dr. King Is Assassinated
guidingquestion How did Martin Luther King, Jr.'s death affect the civil rights movement?
In March 1968, Dr. King went to Memphis, Tennessee, to support a strike c African American sanitation workers. At the time, the SCLC had been planning a national “Poor People’s Campaign” to promote economic advancement for impoverished Americans. The purpose of this campaig was to lobby the federal government to commit billions of dollars to end poverty and unemployment in the United States. People of all races and nationalities were to converge on Washington, D.C., where they would camp out until both Congress and President Johnson agreed to pass the requested legislation to fund the proposal.
On April 4,1968, as he stood on his hotel balcony in Memphis, Dr. Kin was assassinated by a sniper. In a speech the previous night, he had told gathering at a local church, “I’ve been to the mountaintop.... I’ve looke over. And I ve seen the promised land. I may not get there with you, but want you to know tonight that we as a people will get to the promised land.”
490
J
Dr. Kings death touched off both national mourning and riots in more than 100 cities, including Washington, D.C. The Reverend Ralph Abernathy, who had served as a trusted assistant to Dr. King for many years, led the Poor People’s Campaign in Kings absence. However, the demonstration did not achieve any of the major objectives that either King or the SCLC had hoped it would.
In the wake of Dr. King’s death, Congress did pass the Civil Rights Act of 1968. This law, sometimes known as the Fair Housing Act of 1968, outlawed discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, or national origin when selling, renting, or financing housing. In many communities across the nation, racism had led to an informal segregation. People would simply refuse to sell their homes or rent property to people based on their race. Sometime banks would not approve loans because of racist attitudes or assumptions that affected the thinking of the loan officers. The Civil Rights Act of 1968 put an end to these practices.
The law also benefited immigrants and religious minorities. Historically, in many places in the United States,
Jewish Americans had encountered rules preventing them from buying or renting property in certain neighborhoods.
The Civil Rights Act of 1968 expanded their economic opportunities as well.
The assassination of Dr. King in 1968 marked a turning point in the civil rights movement. After his death, the movement began to fragment. With formal laws in place banning segregation and discrimination, and guaranteeing voting rights, the movement lost some of its unity of purpose and the vision he had given it. The shift to economic rights
was already underway at the time of his death, and it was clear that the struggle to end poverty and provide more economic opportunity would be very difficult and would have to involve very different approaches than the movement had used in the past.
D READING PROGRESS CHECK

Explaining In what way was Dr. King's "mountaintop" speech prophetic?
The assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., shocked the nation. On April 9, 1968, the country joined in sorrow to mourn his death.
CRITICAL THINKING
Predicting Consequences How do you think the violence that erupted after Dr. King's death affected the civil rights movement?
LESSON 3 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Explaining Explain how the findings and recommendations of the Kerner Commission related to racism. 9A, 26A
Using Your Notes
2.	Assessing Use your notes on violent events during the civil rights movement to write a paragraph assessing the result of each event.
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Identifying Why did riots break out in dozens of American cities in the late 1960s? 9A
4.	Analyzing Why did many young African Americans join the black power movement? 9A, 9B, 9D, 26A
5.	Making Connections How did Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.'s death affect the civil rights movement? 9A, 9C
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
Assume the role of a reporter in the late 1960s. Suppose that you have interviewed both a follower of Dr. King and a member of the Black Panthers. Write a transcript of each interview. 9A, 9B, 9C, 9D The Civil Rights Movement 491
[ \ j u k -U t	i— t
Sequencing and Reading a Time Line
Why Learn This Skill?
Many people complain that history is just a bunch of dates they have to memorize. In fact, the relationship between events is what really matters to historians. They want to explain what caused something to happen, or how something affected something else over time.
History is a series of causes and effects that happen over time in a sequence. Unlike science, where you can repeat an experiment, in history, everything happens once in a particular order. If you want to know what caused something, you have to know the sequence of events.
Learning the Skill
Sequencing is simply putting things in the correct order. What came first? What came next? Did an event happen before or after another event? Putting historical events in the correct
2C, 29B
sequence will often reveal a possible relationship between them. Historians then look at the historical evidence to see if they can prove that there is a cause-and-effect relationship in the sequence.
Sequencing involves two types of chronology—absolute chronology and relative chronology. Absolute chronology is when something happened. Generally we use a specific date and time to establish absolute chronology. Relative chronology tells when something happened compared to something else. If you give the year President Obama was first elected, you are using absolute chronology. If you are asked whether President Reagan came before or after President Clinton, you use relative chronology to answer.
A very common way to present a sequence of related historical events and teach their relative and absolute chronology is to use a time line. A time line is a kind of chart that can be
Key Events of the Civil Rights Movement, 1954-1965
492
presented on a horizontal or vertical line. It lists events that occurred between specific dates in order. The number of years between these dates is called the time span. For example, a time line that begins in 1400 and ends in 1500 has a time span of 100 years. Time lines are usually divided into smaller segments, or time intervals.
Intervals can be vast, each interval being an entire historical era, or they can be small, a year, a month, a day—whatever is needed to sequence the events.
A time line is a visual aid; it helps you remember the correct order of events and people, and also the dates associated with them. It often includes captions with each event giving a quick summary of what happened.
Practicing this Skill
Look at the time line on key events of the Civil Rights movement, and then answer the questions that follow:
1.	What is the time span of this time line?
2.	What intervals is the time line using?
3.	When did Martin Luther King deliver his I Have a Dream Speech? What major legislation was passed the year after the speech?
4.	Use the time line to put these people and events in the correct relative chronology: Freedom Summer, James Farmer, Greensboro Sit-ins, Rosa Parks
5.	What major event happened just before Congress passed the Voting Rights Act? What relationship is there between the two events?
6.	What possible cause and effect sequence does the time line show between court decisions, protests, and legislation?
Applying the Skill
Sequencing Using Absolute and Relative Chronology Now that you understand sequencing, time lines, and absolute and relative chronology, read through Lesson 3, New Civil Rights Issues. Then go to the lesson, New Approaches to Civil Rights in the chapter, Politics and Economics, 1968-1980. Create a time line sequencing the events of the Civil Rights Movement from 1968-1980. Be sure to include dates and brief one-sentence captions identifying key events and individuals.
493
chapter i6 Assessment
Directions: On a separate sheet of paper, answer the questions below. Make sure you read carefully and answer all parts of the questions.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Summarizing Explain the events leading up to the Brown v. Board of Education decision and summarize the Supreme Court's ruling. 21A, 23A, 23B
0 Analyzing Cause and Effect What role did Rosa Parts
play in the bus boycott in Montgomery, Alabama?
9C, 23A, 26A, 26D
0 Explaining What were the goals of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)? 9B
0 Evaluating What contributions did Thurgood Marshall make to ending segregation and advancing the cause of African American civil rights? 9i, 23A, 23B
0 Describing How did many white southerners react to the Brown v. Board ruling? What actions did they take in response? Identify two southern governors who sought to preserve the status quo in southern schools. What did they do? 9G
0 Describing What actions did President Eisenhower take to address minority rights? Be sure to discuss direct presidential actions as well as legislation he supported. Be sure to explain the obstacles he faced in Congress and explain why he was able to get legislation passed. 9F, 9G
Lesson 2
0 Evaluating What made the sit-in strategy an effective form of protest? 23A.26A
0 Identifying Cause and Effect How did the arrests of Freedom Riders in Mississippi begin a chain of decisions and actions that ultimately led to the collapse, or near collapse, of segregated busing? 23A, 26A
0 Describing Who tried to stop the Civil Rights Act of 1964 from passing the United States Senate and what tactic did they use? How was their opposition overcome? 9F, 9g
(J!) Describing Why was it so difficult for African Americans in southern states to register to vote? 9A
© Summarizing Write a sentence for each of the following people summarizing how they tried to expand political rights for African Americans: James Farmer, Elizabeth Eckford, Robert Moses, Medger Evers. 26A
© Evaluating What was the significance of the Selma
march of 1965, and how did it help to increase
participation of minorities in the political process?
9G, 9H, 23A, 26A
© Describing What prompted President Johnson to propose a new voting rights law? What were the terms of the new law and what did Congress do in response to Johnson's proposal? What did the Congressional response indicate? 9F, 9G
© Analyzing Why was the Twenty-fourth Amendment
passed? How did the amendment expand the right to
participate in the democratic process and help ensure
equal political rights for African Americans and others?
21B, 23A, 23B
Lesson 3
© Explaining What conditions led to riots in urban African American communities in the 1960s?
© Interpreting What was the purpose of the Kerner Commission? 26A
© Identifying and Describing How did Malcolm X's speeches and ideas influence a new generation of African American leaders? 9C
© Identifying Central Issues What were the main ideas of black power?
© Drawing Conclusions Why was 1968, the year of Dr. Martin Luther King's death, a turning point for the civil rights movement? 2D
© Explaining What was the goal of the Poor People's Campaign? 26A
Need Extra Help?
1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8
9	10 Tl 12	13	14	15	15	17	18	19	20
6o to page 147314721475147414741476148014811
£48514801485[486[w]487TZ8T49oT4wT490r^|
494
® Explaining How did the Civil Rights Act of 1968 expand economic opportunities for religious minorities? 26A
Answering the Essential Questions
0 Conducting an Historical Inquiry Segregation began to
be imposed in the late 1800s. African Americans began
resisting it shortly afterward. But from 1900 to 1950, they
made only small gains in their efforts to roll back
segregation and regain their civil rights. What changed in
the 1950s and 1960s? Why was the civil rights movement
able to make gains in post-war America? Conduct research
at the library or online. Identify the types of evidence you
need and prepare a research essay paper answering these
questions. Your paper should follow proper essay form.
Sources should be cited, and a bibliography attached. The
essay should have an introduction, argument and
presentation of evidence, and a conclusion.
9A, 9B, 29A, 29B, 29D, 29E, 29H
0 Analyzing Identify the different types of non-violent
protest used during the Civil Rights movement and explain
what each group was trying to achieve with their protest.
23A
Critical Thinking
© Analyzing Effects Why was the Supreme Court's
decision in Brown v. Board of Education significant?
91, 21A
® Identifying Describe Martin Luther King's role in the civil rights movement. What were his successes, and what qualities made him an effective leader? 9C, 24A, 26A
0 Analyzing Describe the role litigation played in protecting minority rights during the civil rights movement and expanding the right to participate in the democratic process? How effective were lawsuits in bringing about change? 9i
Evaluating What changes resulted from the civil rights movement? Did these changes increase minority participation in the political process? 9A, 9H
© Explaining What constitutional issues were raised by the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965? Name the two important cases from the 1960s where the Supreme Court addressed the issues
raised and explain the reason the Court upheld both laws.
19B
Social Studies Skills
© Organizing Make a chart that lists each of the major pieces of legislation passed by Congress during the Civil Rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s. Summarize what each piece of legislation contributed to achieving equal political rights for African Americans. 9F, 23B, 29B
(J) Using Absolute and Relative Chronology Create a timeline listing the following people and their role in the civil rights movement in the correct chronological sequence. Beside each name or event, write the year when the person made his or her contribution. 2C, 9C
•	President Eisenhower sends troops to Little Rock
•	Martin Luther King helps organize Montgomery Bus Boycott
•	Rosa Parks is arrested
•	The Freedom Riders begin their trips into the South
•	Thurgood Marshall wins Brown v. Board
•	James Farmer founds Congress on Racial Equality
•	President Johnson signs the Voting Rights Act
•	Four men begin the sit-in movement in Greensboro, North Carolina
•	The March on Washington takes place
•	Dr. King is assassinated
•	Filibuster by southern senators is shut down allowing a new civil rights act to pass
•	African Americans march on Selma
e Comparing and Contrasting What were the differences between the leaders of the Black Power Movement and Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.? What goals did they share? Describe the two approaches to expanding African American civil rights and economic opportunities and explain which was more effective and why. 9D, 26A
Need Extra Help?
21	22	23	24	25	26	27
28	29	30	31
1 Go to page	| 491 | 469 | 469 | 473 | 475 | 469 | 469 [
| 469 | 469 I 475 |
The Civil Rights Movement 495
Analyzing Primary Sources
Read the excerpt below from Martin Luther King Jr.'s "Letter from Birmingham Jail", and then answer the questions that follow:
PRIMARYSOURCE
« One may well ask: "How can you advocate breaking some laws and obeying others?"The answer lies in the fact that there are two types of laws: just and unjust.... [and] one has a moral responsibility to disobey unjust laws. I would agree with St. Augustine that'an unjust law is no law at all.'
... Any law that uplifts human personality is just. Any law that degrades human personality is unjust. All segregation statutes are unjust because segregation distorts the soul and damages the personality. »
—Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. from "Letter from Birmingham Jail"
Q
Generalizing How did the philosophy Dr. King describes in his letter shape the Civil Rights movement? 9E, 29A, 29B (J) Interpreting Primary Sources What do you think Dr. King meant when he wrote that an unjust law degrades human personality? 29A, 29B
Read the excerpt below from President Lyndon Johnson's speech at the time of signing the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and then answer the questions that follow:
PRIMARYSOURCE
One hundred and eighty-eight years ago this week a small band of valiant men began a long struggle for freedom. They pledged their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honor not only to found a nation, but to forge an ideal of freedom....
We believe that all men are created equal. Yet many are denied equal treatment. We believe that all men have certain unalienable rights. Yet many Americans do not enjoy those rights. We believe that all men are entitled to the blessings of liberty. Yet millions are being deprived of those blessings—not because of their own failures, but because of the color of their skin. The reasons are deeply imbedded in history and tradition and the nature of man. We can understand—without rancor or
hatred—how this all happened. But it cannot continue. Our Constitution, the foundation of our Republic, forbids it. The principles of our freedom forbid it. Morality forbids it. And the law I will sign tonight forbids it. ”
—Remarks upon signing the Civil Rights Bill, July 2,1964
Interpreting Primary Sources What event is Johnson referencing that had happened 188 years previously. Who are the "valiant men" he mentions? 1A, 29A
Analyzing Primary Sources How does Johnson's speech
show that the founding principles of the United States
were still being applied to decision-making in the 1960s?
1A, 1B, 29A
© Evaluating What did the Civil Rights Act of 1964 accomplish? Was it a success? 1B, 9F, 29A
Extended Response Question
© Summarizing Identify each of the following organizations: NAACP, SNCC, SCLC, and CORE. Write a paragraph about each organization, describing its contribution to the civil rights movement and describing its approach to expanding the civil rights of African Americans. 9B, 29B
Standardized Test Practice
© What did Governor George Wallace do in an attempt to maintain the status quo at the University of Alabama in 1963? 9G
A
He allowed African Americans to enroll at the university. B
He put a poll tax in place so students could not register. C He put National Guardsmen onto the campus. D
He tried to block African Americans from registering. © Which landmark case did NAACP attorney Thurgood Marshall argue before the Supreme Court?
F
Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United States G Brown v. Board of Education H Katzenbach v. Morgan J White v.Regester Need Extra Help?
	32	33	34	35	36	37	38	39
| Go to page	1496	14961	| 496 |	|««	| 483		483	| 474 I
496
The Vietnam War
networks
There's More Online about how the Vietnam War changed the United States.
1954-1975
CHAPTER
17
Lesson 1
Going to War in Vietnam
Lesson 2
Vietnam Divides the Nation
Lesson 3
The War Winds Down
The Story Matters...
Americans had supported their government's war efforts and helped win a decisive victory in World War II. The war in Vietnam, however, was different; people questioned whether the United States should be involved at all. As more Americans came to believe their leaders were not being truthful about the war, the country changed in a profound way.
◄ Hundreds of thousands of young Americans went to Vietnam to fight a war that was different from previous U.S. military conflicts.
PHOTO:
Doug Wilson/Historical/CORBIS 497
