CHAPTER 9
Lesson 1
The Causes ofthe Great Depression
Lesson 2
Life During the Great Depression
Lesson 3
Hoover's Response to the Depression
The Story Matters...
During the prosperous 1920s, optimism drove stock prices to new highs, but risky investment practices set the stage for a crash. Sensing danger, investors sold their holdings, causing the market to lose billions of dollars and the nation's banks to collapse.
Companies went out of business, millions of Americans were unemployed, and families could not buy food. When a terrible drought struck the Great Plains, farmers were unable to grow crops, leading to even more devastation.
◄ A destitute mother and other workers'families were stranded after the pea crop they were to harvest failed. The government sent 20,000 pounds of food to help the stranded workers at the farm in California.
PHOTO:
Dorothea Lange/Bettmann/CORBIS 287
CHAPTER 9	f
Place andTime: United States 1928-1933
When the stock market crashed in October 1929, the extreme optimism ofthe 1920s turned to the profound despair of the Great Depression, By the early 1930s, more Americans were demanding the government's help. Veterans grew frustrated and began to march to Capitol Hill to demand the immediate payment of a promised bonus. Wearing ragged military uniforms and singing old war songs, this "Bonus Army" traveled the highways and railroads to Washington, D.C., to protest their plight. By July 1932, more than 15,000 unemployed veterans, each asking the government for early payment of cash bonuses due to be paid in 1945, converged on the nation's capital.
Step Into the Place
Read the quotes and look at the information presented on the map.	16c, 29A, 29E
DBQ
Analyzing Historical Documents How do the following quotes reflect the ways people helped one another during the Great Depression?

PRIMARY SOURCE
6<The conductor^ want to find out how many guys were in the yard, so he would know how many empty boxcars to put onto the train. Of course, the railroad companies didn't know this, but these conductors, out of their sympathy, would put two or three empty boxcars in the train, so these bonus marchers could crawl into them and ride comfortable into Washington. ”
—Jim Sheridan, a traveler with the Bonus Army in 1932, quoted in An American Epic
PRIMARY SOURCE
** With American flags flying before them, sixteen truckloads of war veterans came to the end of a transcontinental hitch-hike today with the avowed purpose of remaining in Washington until Congress pays their bonus in I
Weather-beaten, travel-strained and dog-tired, the former soldiers—330 from the Pacific Coast—crossed the District line in trucks supplied by Maryland and found a hot stew, bread, milk and coffee awaiting them.**
—from the New York Times, May 30,1932
30 Hawley-Smoot iff is enacted
1931 National Credit Corporation is established to help troubled banks
May 1932 Bonus Army marchers arrive in Washington, D.C.
F.
Roosevelt 1933-1945
■J—								
				S’ » S‘-» 1: fe	-						.	'	
, „ i aiaiiiOIOillWBB
'30 European countries begin raise tariff rates and boycott lerican products
1931 Britain abandons the gold standard
1932 Unemployment in Germany nears 30 percent
77?e Great Depression Begins 289
"3'
networks
There's More Online!
Ef BIOGRAPHY Herbert Hoover
Ef BIOGRAPHY Alfred E. Smith
Ef CHART/GRAPH Income and Spending
Ef CHART/GRAPH Unemployment
Ef CHART/GRAPH Value of Exports
Ef IMAGE Car for Sale
eT VIDEO The Crash
Ef INTERACTIVE SELF-CHECK QUIZ
"W3
LESSON 1
The Causes of thelireat Depression


in the economy
Reading HELPDESK
Academic Vocabulary
•	collapse
•	invest
sum
It Matters Because
Although the 1920s were prosperous, speculation in the stock market, risky lending policies, overproduction, and uneven income distribution eventually undermined the economy and led to the Great Depression.
The Long Bull Market
Content Vocabulary
•	stock market • margin call
•	hull market • bank run
•	speculation • installment
•	margin
TAKING NOTES:
g u s di n g q y est i o n What economic choices caused the economy to become unstable in the late 1920s?
The economic collapse that began in 1929 seemed unimaginable months before. In the 1928 election, both presidential candidates painted a rosy picture of the future. Republican presidential nominee Herbert Hoover declared, “We are nearer to the final triumph over poverty than ever before in the history of any land.”
Key Ideas and Details
Organizing As you read the lesson, complete a graphic organizer similar to the one below to list the causes of the Depression.
Causes
Great
Depression


TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 16B identify the causes of the Great Depression, including the impact of tariffs on world trade, stock market speculation, bank failures, and the monetary policy of the Federal Reserve System
continued on the next page
The Election of 1928
For the presidential election of 1928, the Democrats chose Alfred E. Smith, governor of New York. Smith was the first Roman Catholic to win a major party’s presidential nomination. He faced a tough challenger, as Herbert Hoover was secretary of commerce and former head of the Food Administration.
Smith’s religious beliefs became a campaign issue. Some Protestants claimed the Catholic Church financed Smith’s campaign and would have inappropriate influence on American politics. The attacks embarrassed Hoover, a Quaker, and he tried to quash them, but the charges damaged Smith’s candidacy.
The prosperity of the 1920s—for which the Republicans took full credit—was a bigger challenge to Smith’s candidacy. Hoover won in a landslide. On March 4, 1929, an estimated 50,000 onlookers stood in the rain to listen to Hoover’s Inaugural Address. “I have no fears for the future of our country,” proclaimed Hoover. “It is bright with hope.” The Stock Market Soars
The optimism that swept Hoover into office also drove stock prices to new highs. Sometimes the stock market has a long period of
290
rising stock prices, or a bull market. The bull market of the 1920s convinced many to invest in stocks. By 1929, approximately 10 percent of American households owned stocks.
Before the late 1920s, stock prices generally reflected their true values. In the late 1920s, however, many investors failed to consider a company’s earnings and profits. Buyers engaged in speculation, or betting the market would continue to climb, thus enabling them to sell stock and make money quickly.
Many investors bought stocks on margin, making only a small cash down payment (as low as 10 percent of the price). With $1,000, an investor could buy a sum of $10,000 worth of stock. The remaining $9,000 came as an interest-bearing loan from the stockbroker. Quick profits were possible if stock prices kept rising, but problems came when prices began to fall. To protect a loan, a broker could issue a margin call, demanding the investor repay the loan at once.
a READING f’P.j ,
Summarizing What investment decisions destabilized the economy during the 1920s?
The Great Crash
-a,	.	How did the stock market crash trigger a chain of events that led to the Depression?
The bull market lasted only as long as investors continued putting new money into it. In September 1929, the market peaked. Prices then began an uneven downward slide. As investors decided the boom was over, they sold more stock, causing prices to decline even further.
The Stock Market Crash
On Monday, October 21, 1929, the comedian Groucho Marx was awakened by a telephone call from his broker. “You’d better get down here with some cash to cover your margin,” the broker said. The stock market had plunged. The dazed comedian had to pay back the money he had borrowed to buy stocks, which were now selling for far less than he had paid for them. Other brokers made similar margin calls. Customers put stocks up for sale at a frenzied pace, driving the market into a tailspin.
On October 24, a day that came to be called Black Thursday, the market plummeted further. Marx was wiped out. His earnings from plays and films
collapse a sudden loss of force, value, or effect
stock market a system for buying and selling stocks in corporations
bull market a long period of rising stock prices
invest to put money into a company in order to gain a future financial reward
speculation act of buying stocks at great risk with the anticipation that the prices will rise
margin buying a stock by paying only a fraction ofthe stock price and borrowing the rest sum a specified amount of money
margin call demand by a broker that investors pay back loans made for stocks purchased on margin
(continued from p. 290)
TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 16C analyze the effects ofthe Great Depression on the U.S. economy and society such as widespread unemployment and deportation and repatriation of people of European and Mexican heritage and others
CHARTS/GRAPHS
THE MARKET FALLS
Source: Standard and ? s mt/; 1
ecord.
Until the crash of 1929, investors pumped money into the market, often buying stocks on margin.
1	Making Inferences Look at
the graph. What can you infer about the health ofthe stock market prior to 1929?	j
2	Making Generalizations
Look at the graph. What	i
generalization can you make	I
about the variation in highs and lows ofthe stock market from 1920 to 1932?	i
The Great Depression Begins 291
Il
Mayhem erupted on Wall Street after the stock market crashed.
were gone, and he was deeply in debt. His son recalled his visit to the brokerage firm, as Groucho spotted his broker:
PRIMARY SOURCE
tt He was sitting in front ofthe now-stilled ticker-tape machine, with his head buried in his hands. Ticker tape was strewn around him on the floor, and the place... looked as if it hadn't been swept out in a week. [Groucho] tapped [him] on the shoulder, [and said]'Aren't you the fellow who said nothing could go wrong—that we were in a world market?"! guess I made a mistake,'said Mr. Green.'No, I'm the one who made a mistake,'said [Groucho].'! listened to you.'"
—from Life with Groucho, 195
vs ’ t’c 3jLKg
Identifying Central Ideas What investment practices most destabilized the stock market?
The following week, on October 29, a day that was later dubbed Black Tuesday, prices took the steepest dive yet. That day, more than 16 million shares of stock were sold, and the value of the industrial index (a measure ofthe value of leading industrial companies) dropped by 10 percent. By mid-November, the market price of stocks had dropped by more than one-third Some $30 billion was lost, a sum roughly equal to the total wages Americans earned in 1929. Although the stock market crash was not the major cause of the Depression, it undermined the economy’s ability to overcome other weaknesses.
bank run persistent and heavy demands by a bank's depositors, creditors, or customers to withdraw money
Banks Begin to Close
The market crash weakened the nation’s banks in two ways. First, by 1929, banks had lent billions to stock speculators. Second, many banks had invested depositors’ money in the stock market, hoping for high returns. When stock values collapsed, banks lost money on their investments, and speculators defaulted on their loans. Having suffered serious losses, many banks cut back drastically on loans. With less credit available, consumers and businesses were not able to borrow as much money, sending the economy into a recession.
Some banks could not absorb the losses they suffered and had to close. The government did not insure bank deposits, so if a bank failed, customer! including even those who did not invest in the stock market, lost their savings. As a growing number of banks closed in 1929 and 1930, a severe crisis of confidence in the banking system further destabilized the economy
News of bank failures worried Americans. Some depositors made runs on banks, thus causing the banks to fail. A bank run takes place when man; depositors decide to withdraw their money at the same time, usually out of fear that the bank will collapse. Most banks make a profit by lending money received from depositors and collecting interest on the loans. The bank keeps only a fraction of depositors’ money in reserve. Usually, that reserve is enough to meet the bank’s needs. If too many people withdraw their money, however, the bank will collapse. By 1932, about one in four banks in the United States had gone out of business.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Determining Cause and Effect How did the failure of the stock market contribute to larger economic decline?
The Roots of the Great Depression
-SUSDSNG question What were the underlying conditions that led to the collapse of the US. economy?
The stock market crash played a major role in putting the economy into a recession. Yet the crash would not have led to a long-lasting depression if other forces had not been at work. The roots of the Great Depression were deeply entangled in the economy of the 1920s.
The Uneven Distribution of Income
Overproduction was a factor leading to the onset of the Great Depression. More efficient machinery increased the production capacity of factories and farms. Most Americans did not earn enough to buy up the goods they helped produce. Manufacturing output per person-hour rose 32 percent, but the average worker’s wage increased only 8 percent. In 1929 the top 5 percent of all American households earned 30 percent of the nation’s income. In contrast, about two-thirds of families earned less than $2,500 a year, leaving them with little disposable income.
Farmers, in particular, did not share in the prosperity of the 1920s, as many had gone into debt to buy land or equipment during World War I, when demand for their products was high. When prices fell, they tried to produce even more to pay their debts, taxes, and living expenses. Prices dropped so low that many farmers went bankrupt and lost their farms.
During the 1920s, many Americans had purchased high-cost items, such as refrigerators and cars, on the installment plan. Purchasers could make small down payments and pay the remainder of the item’s price in monthly installments. Paying off such debts eventually forced some buyers to stop making new purchases. Because of the decrease in demand for their products, manufacturers in turn cut production and laid off employees.
The slowdown in retail sales reverberated throughout the economy. When radio sales slumped, for example, orders for copper wire, wood cabinets, and glass radio tubes slowed. Montana copper miners, Minnesota lumberjacks, and Ohio glassworkers lost jobs. Jobless workers cut purchases, further reducing sales. This put even more Americans out of work.
CAUSES OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION
installment regular periodic payment made to pay off the cost of an item when buying it on credit
CHARTS/GRAPHS
1	Identifying Central Ideas
What basic economic principle underlay the cause of the Great Depression?
2	Analyzing Information What effect did the decline in automobile sales have on related industries?
I
What Caused the Economy to Collapse? Low Interest Rates
Federal Reserve kept interest rates low; companies borrowed money and expanded more than necessary. Overproduction
Companies made more goods than could be sold.
Uneven Distribution of Wealth Not everyone who wanted consumer goods could afford them.
High Tariffs
Tariffs restricted foreign demand for American goods.
Falling Demand
With too many goods unsold, production was cut back and employees were laid off. Stock Market Speculation Low interest rates encouraged borrowing money to speculate, endangering bank solvency.
WhichWd contribute further to:
Cyclical
Effect
Industry slowed, which caused:
Automobile sales declined. This loss of demand meant less deman^
Textiles
Steel

Oil
Rubber
SO
0
The Great Depression Begins 293
— Analyzing-----
Primary Sources
Hoover Rejects Government Intervention
f^You cannot extend the mastery of the government over the daily working life of a people without at the same time making it the master of the peoples souls and thoughts.... Free speech does not live many hours after free industry and free commerce die.... Every step of bureaucratizing of the business of our country poisons the very roots of liberalism—that is, political equality, free speech, free assembly, free press, and equality of opportunity. It is the road not to more liberty, but to less liberty.
—Herbert Hoover, from a speech delivered October 22,1928
DBQ
ANALYZING PRIMARY
SOURCES
Why did Hoover refuse to support government intervention in the economy? Unemployment insurance was nonexistent. Many families had little or no savings. Lost jobs often meant dire circumstances. In 1930 alone, about 26,000 businesses failed.
The Loss of Export Sales
Many jobs might have been saved if American manufacturers had sold more goods abroad. As the bull market of the 1920s sped up, however,
U.S. banks made loans to speculators rather than loans to foreign companies. Loans from U.S. banks had helped European nations make war reparations and pay down war debts. They had also secured foreign markets for U.S. exports. Without these loans from U.S. banks, foreign companies purchased fewer American products.
In 1929 Hoover wanted to encourage overseas trade by lowering tariffs. Congress, however, decided to protect American industry from foreign competition by raising tariffs. The resulting legislation, the Hawley-Smoot Tariff, raised the average tariff rate to the highest level in American history. In the end, it failed to help American businesses, because foreign countries responded by raising their own tariffs. This meant fewer American products were sold overseas. By 1932, exports had fallen to less than half the level that they had been in 1929. A decrease in exports hurt both American companies and farmers.
Mistakes by the Federal Reserve
Just as consumers were able to buy more goods on credit, access to easy money propelled the stock market. Instead of raising interest rates to curb excessive speculation, the Federal Reserve Board kept its rates low throughout the 1920s.
The Board’s failure to raise interest rates significantly helped cause the Depression in two ways. First, by keeping rates low, the Board encouraged member banks to make risky loans. Second, the low interest rates led business leaders to think that the economy was still expanding. As a result, they borrowed more money to expand production. This was a serious mistake because it led to overproduction when sales were falling. When the Depression finally hit, companies had to lay off workers to cut costs. Then the Federal Reserve made another mistake: it raised interest rates, thus tightening credit. The economy continued to spiral downward.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Determining Cause and Effect What were three existing economic conditions that contributed to the Depression?
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Contrasting What is the difference between buying on margin and a margin call? 16B
2.	Describing What occurs during a bank run? 16B.16C
3.	Evaluating Why was buying stocks based on speculation a risk?
16B
Using Your Notes
4.	Identifying Cause and Effect Use the notes that you completed during the lesson to write a few sentences identifying the causes of the Great Depression. 16B
Answering the Guiding Questions
5.	Evaluating What economic choices caused the economy to become unstable in the late 1920s? 16B
6.	Describing How did the stock market crash trigger a chain of events that led to the Depression? 16B
7.	Analyzing What were the underlying conditions that led to the collapse ofthe U.S. economy? 16B
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
Write an essay for a financial magazine telling the chain of events leading to the Great Depression. Be sure to sequence the events correctly to make then easier for readers to understand. 16B 294
ietw@rks
here's More Online!
cademic Vocabulary
It Matters Because
Large numbers of people lost their jobs and homes during the Depression. To help people escape their troubles, popular entertainment offered humorous and optimistic movies and radio programs. Novelists and photographers created more realistic portrayals of American life.
suspend • technique colleague
intent Vocabulary	j
bailiff • soap opera	j
hobo	j
IKING NOTES: J
ty Ideas and Details	j
rganizing As you read, use a	|
aphic organizer such as the one below	s
describe the effects ofthe	j
epression.	J
effects ofthe Great Depression |	j
5 i □□ i i	I
I
w
J
k	\
FK
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills___j 12A analyze the impact of physical and human geographic factors on the	I
settlement of the Great Plains, the	i
Klondike Gold Rush, the Panama Canal, the Dust Bowl, and the levee failure in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina
14A identify the effects of population	j
growth and distribution on the physical	J
environment
continued on the next page
The Depression Worsens
:	question Howdid economic changes affect everyday life during the 1930s?
The Depression grew steadily worse during President Hoover’s administration. In 1930, across the nation, 1,352 banks suspended operations, more than twice the number of bank failures in 1929. In 1932 alone, some 30,000 companies went out of business. By 1933, roughly one-fourth of the workforce was unemployed.
Struggling to Get By
The jobless often went hungry. When possible, they stood in breadlines for free food or lined up outside soup kitchens set up by private groups. People who could not pay their rent or mortgage lost their homes. Some, paralyzed by fear and humiliation, did not move and were evicted. Court officers called bailiffs ejected them and their belongings. Throughout the country, newly homeless people put up shacks on unused or public lands. They built shantytowns, which they called Hoovervilles after the president they blamed for their plight.
In search of work or a better life, many homeless, unemployed Americans began walking, hitchhiking, or, most often, “riding the rails” across the country. These wanderers, called hoboes, would sneak past railroad police to slip into open boxcars on freight trains. Hundreds of thousands of people, mostly boys and young men, wandered from place to place in this way.
The Depression also caused many immigrants to return to their native countries. In some cases, this repatriation was voluntary as jobs
The Great Depression Begins 295
Many Americans abandoned their homes as windstorms and drought turned the Great Plains into a Dust Bowl.
became scarce. In other cases, repatriation was forced. The federal government launched repatriation drives to send poor immigrants back to their home countries. It also stepped up efforts to deport immigrants who had violated the law. In the Southwest, federal officials rounded up Mexicans (often without regard to their citizenship status) and forcibly returned them to Mexico.
Although estimates vary, historians believe that the Mexican Repatriation resulted in somewhere between 500,000 and 2 million people of Mexican heritage, perhaps more that half of whom were American citizens, being

Making Generalizations How does this photo illustrate the Depression experience of some Americans?
forced to move to Mexico. Mexicans were probably targeted more than others, in part because of racism, and in part because of cost. Hispanics were one ofthe most highly visible immigrant minorities remaining after the immigration laws ofthe 1920s had restricted other immigrants and deporting them was easier am less expensive than shipping hundreds of thousands of people back to Europe.
The Dust Bowl
suspend to cease or stop
bailiff minor officer of the courts
hobo a homeless and usually penniless wanderer
Farmers soon faced a new disaster. The Great Plains were very dry with high winds. Topsoil was held in place by deep rooted prairie grasses that preserved moisture in times of low rainfall. The Homestead Act had and encouraged large-scale settlement of the region and as the population grew, tractors and combines came into widespread use, much of the Great Plains were extensively deep-plowed making the topsoil susceptible to rapid erosion.
Deep-plowing was not a problem for many decades, as the Great Plains experienced higher than normal rainfall from the late 1800s to the 1920s. But when crop prices dropped in the 1920s, many farmers left their fields uncultivated even as temperatures had begun to climb and rainfall had begun to decline. In the early 1930s, a severe drought hit, and there was nothing anchoring the soil or retaining moisture. The soil turned to dust. Human and physical geographic factors had combined to create a disaster.
Winds blew the arid earth aloft, blackening the sky for hundreds of miles. Dust buried crops and livestock. Humans and animals caught outdoors sometimes died of suffocation when the dust filled their lungs. During most of the 1930s, an average of 50 dust storms a year hit the Plain*
Some Great Plains farmers managed to hold on to their land, but othei were not as lucky. If their land was mortgaged, they had to turn the property over to the banks. Then, nearly penniless, many families headed west, hoping for a better life in California. Because many migrants were from Oklahoma, they became known as “Okies.” In California, their struggles continued:
(continued from p. 295)
ma Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills
16C analyze the effects of the Great Depression on the U.S. economy and society such as widespread unemployment and deportation and repatriation of people of European and Mexican heritage and others
25A describe how the characteristics and issues in U.S. history have been reflected in various genres of art, music, film, and literature
PRIMARYSOURCE
[They have] one-room shacks usually about 10 by 12 feet, have no rug, no water, no bed. In one corner there is a little iron wood stove. Water must be carried from the faucet at the end ofthe street.5
— John Steinbeck, from The Harvest Gypsies, 1
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Explaining What changes to daily life occurred for people affected by the economi hardships of the Great Depression?
Arts and Entertainment
GUIDING QUESTION
In whatways did culture reflect the Depression experience? The hard times of the 1930s led many Americans to want to escape their worries. Movies and radio programs grew increasingly popular. During the 1930s, more than 60 million Americans went to the movies each week.
Child stars delighted viewers, and comedies provided a relief from daily worries. The Marx Brothers amused audiences in such films as Animal Crackers. Moviegoers also loved cartoons. Walt Disney produced the first feature-length animated film, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, in 1937.
Serious films often celebrated ordinary people and the values of smalltown America. In Mr. Smith Goes to Washington, Jimmy Stewart played a decent but naive senator. He refuses to compromise his principles and exposes the corruption of some of his colleagues. Although few movies portrayed the hard times of the era, dramas tended to show heroes, often regular people, standing up to corruption or powerful forces. These films resonated with Americans because they offset the feelings of helplessness the Depression had caused, and also reflected the belief of many people that they were victims of corruption among the wealthy and powerful.
In 1939 MGM produced The Wizard of Oz, a colorful musical that lifted viewers’ spirits. That same year, Vivien Leigh and Clark Gable thrilled audiences in Gone with the Wind, a Civil War epic that won nine Academy Awards. Hattie McDaniel won Best Supporting Actress, becoming the first African American to win an Academy Award.
While movies captured the imagination, radio offered information and entertainment. Tens of millions of people listened to the radio daily.
Comedians such as Jack Benny were popular, as were the adventures of superheroes such as the Green Hornet. Daytime dramas continued their story lines from day to day. Programs such as The Guiding Light presented the personal struggles of middle-class families. The sponsors were often makers of laundry soaps, so the shows were nicknamed soap operas. Radio also exposed listeners to a variety of musical styles. Americans enjoyed hit songs from movies and Broadway musicals to swing music to country.
Literature and the visual arts also flourished during the 1930s. Writers and artists tried to portray life around them, using the homeless and unemployed as their subjects in stories and pictures. Novelists developed new writing techniques. In The Sound and the Fury, William Faulkner shows what characters are thinking and feeling before they speak. Using this stream of consciousness technique/ he exposes hidden attitudes of the residents of a fictional Mississippi county.
Perhaps no writer did more than reporter and novelist John Steinbeck did to capture the characteristics and issues of the Depression. Steinbeck focused on the rural poor, particularly agricultural workers and farmers. He created a sense of realism with rich detailed descriptions, showing how people said things and what they and their surroundings looked like. He focused on how their circumstances were partly the result of the economic system, but he also stressed the importance of friendship and family in helping people survive hardship.
Steinbeck’s writings added flesh and blood to journalists reports of poverty and misfortune and evoked both sympathy for his characters and indignation at social injustice. In The Grapes of Wrath (1939), Steinbeck tells the story of a family fleeing the Dust Bowl to find a new life in California. Steinbeck had visited the camps of migrant families and sympathized with
colleague a person who works in the same, or a similar, profession
soap opera a serial drama on television or radio using melodramatic situations
technique a method of achieving a desired aim
The Great Depression Begins 297
BIOGRAPHY
Margaret Bourke-White was Life magazine'sfirst female photojournalist. Her picture ofthe construction of Fort Peck Dam appeared on the magazine's first cover.
CRITICAL THINKING
Making Generalizations Why do you think photojournalism became so influential?
their fears. In his novel, he describes the experiences of the Joad family who headed to California after losing their farm.
Images were also becoming more influential. Photographers roamed the nation with the new 35-millimeter cameras, seeking new subjects. In 1936 TIME magazine publisher Henry Luce introduced Life, a weekly photojournalism magazine that enjoyed instant success. The striking pictures of photojournalists Dorothea Lange and Margaret Bourke-White showed how the Great Depression affected average Americans.
Lange photographed homeless people in San Francisco and poor migrant agricultural workers in California’s Central Valley. One of her most famous photos, entitled “Migrant Mother” (1936) exemplifies the Depression era’s characteristics and issues. The photo depicts a sad weary women with seven children who had just sold her car’s tires to buy food. Lange also traveled throughout the Dust Bowl states capturing images of the devastated region. When the images were collected in a best-selling book An American Exodus (1939), the state of California responded by setting up camps to shelter migrant workers.
Like Lange, Margaret Bourke-White was a master at using photography to capture the era’s ironies and contrasts. In 1937, Life magazine carried one of hei most famous photographs. It showed a line of poor African American flood victims waiting for help in front of a billboard which declared, “World’s Highes Standard of Living” and showed a white family happily driving a car.
Painters of the 1930s included Thomas Hart Benton and Grant Wood, whose styles were referred to as the regionalist school. Their work emphasized traditional American values, especially those of the rural Midwest and South. Wood’s best-known painting today is American Gothic. The portrait pays tribul to no-nonsense Midwesterners while gently making fun of their severity.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Examining How did the Depression influence culture?
SKILLS PRACTICE
Work with a partner. Have your partner tell you something about life during the Great Depression. Listen carefully while your partner talks. Summarize or retell what your partner has told you.
LESSON 2 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Summarizing Why were the lives of hoboes difficult during the Depression? 16C
Using Your Notes
2.	Identifying How did some radio shows come to be nicknamed soap operas? 25A
Answering the Guiding Questions
3.	Evaluating How did economic changes affect everyday life during the 1930s? 16C.25A
4.	Describing In what ways did culture reflect the Depression experience? 25A, 25B
Writing Activity
INFORMATIVE/EXPLANATORY
Write two to three paragraph: describing the Dust Bowl, its causes, its effect on people, and how it made the Great Depression worse for those living on the Great Plains. 12A 298
TEKS 12A, 16B, 29B
Determining Cause and Effect
Why Learn This Skill?
Why do we study history? We know things have happened in the past that have shaped the world we live in today. There are many things we appreciate and other things that we think are wrong. The purpose of history, perhaps more than anything else, is to explain why things happened and what changed as a result. In short, understanding history requires you to identify cause-and-effect relationships.
Learning the Skill
Determining cause and effect involves considering why an event occurred. A cause is an action, an event, a condition, or a decision that makes something else happen. What happens is the effect.
There are three kinds of causes. Necessary causes are causes that you have to have or the event cannot happen. A sufficient cause is a cause that all by itself can cause an event. But it is not the only possible cause. Contributory causes cannot cause an event by themselves, but they can help shape the conditions under which it happens.
To determine cause and effect follow these steps:
•	Ask why an event happened. List possible reasons for the event.
•	Look at the list. Which causes are necessary? Are they all necessary? Which ones might be sufficient but not needed to explain the event. Which causes only contributed to shaping the event?
•	Look at the timing of the causes. Which ones established conditions far in the past. These are long range causes. Which ones helped trigger an event once conditions were in place? These are short-term or immediate causes.
•	To determine effects, ask "What happened because of this?" or "What were the results of this?"
•	Examine what effects happened right away and which ones only developed
slowly over time. These are short and long-range effects.
•	Be sure you have causes and events in the correct sequence.
•	Make sure there is a logical or reasonable connection between the causes and effects you have identified. Sometimes things happen close together, but that doesn't mean one caused the other. Writing history is all about explaining why your evidence proves a cause and effect relationship.
Practicing this Skill
Open the lesson "Life During the Great Depression." Read the section entitled "The Dust Bowl" and answer these questions:
1.	What event is being explained in this section?
2.	What causes are said to have explained the event?
3.	Which causes are long-range causes? Which causes are short term causes?
4.	Which causes are necessary? Which are contributory?
5.	What were the effects of these causes?
y
Applying the Skill
l Open the lesson “The Causes of the Great i Depression.” Reread the lesson and apply
your skills at determining cause and effect.
; Write a brief essay describing the causes of
the Great Depression. Be sure to identify J short term and long term causes, and point
out which causes led to effects that in turn i led to even more causes that made the | Depression worse. Identify which causes i were necessary to the Depression, and
which ones were contributory.
299
Academic Vocabulary
causes changes in the economy feet societies?
IT MATTERS BECAUSE
President Hoover tried to fix the economy by providing loam to banks and corporations and by starting public works projects. Later, he reluctantly supported direct aid to impoverished families. By the early 1930s, more Americans were demanding the government's help.
• series
community
Content Vocabulary
•	public works • foreclose
•	relief
TAKING NOTES:
Key Ideas and Details
Categorizing As you read about Herbert Hoover's response to the Depression, create a graphic organizer listing his major initiatives and their results.
| Major Recovery Plans |
1 11 1 1 ■1	
	
1 Results 1 1 Results 1	1 Results 1

TEKS
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills 16C analyze the effects ofthe Great Depression on the U.S. economy and society such as widespread unemployment and deportation and repatriation of people of European and Mexican heritage and others
Promoting Recovery
guiding question How did President Hoover's governing philosophy influence his efforts to combat the Great Depression?
On Friday, October 25, 1929, the day after Black Thursday, President Herbert Hoover declared that “the fundamental business of the country ... is on a sound and prosperous basis.” On March 1930, he told the press that “the worst effects of the crash upon employment will have passed during the next sixty days.” Critics derided his optimism as conditions worsened. Hoover hoped to downplay the public’s fears and to avoid more bank runs and layoffs. He urged consumers and business leaders to make rationa decisions. In the end, Hoover’s efforts failed to inspire the publics confidence, and the economy continued its downward slide.
Hoover believed that American “rugged individualism” would keep the economy moving and that the government should not step in to help individuals. After World War I, many European countries implemented a form of socialism, which Hoover felt contributed to their lack of economic recovery. In 1922 Hoover h< written a book, American Individualism, explaining why the American system of individualism was the best social, political, spiritual, and economic system. Thus, it was difficult for him to propose more government control.
Despite public statements that the economy was not in trouble, Hoover was worried. He organized a series of conferences, bringing together heads of banks, railroads, and other big businesses, as well as labor leaders and government officials to strategize about solutions.
300

Industry leaders pledged to keep factories open and to stop slashing wages, but by 1931, they had broken those pledges. Hoover increased funding for public works, or government-financed building projects. The resulting construction jobs employed a small fraction ofthe millions of unemployed. The only way the government could create enough new jobs was through massive spending, which Hoover refused to do.
Someone had to pay for public works projects. If the government raised taxes, consumers would have less money to spend, hurting business. If the government kept taxes low and ran a budget deficit—spending more than it collected it would have to borrow money, making less available for loans. As the 1930 congressional elections approached, most Americans blamed the party in power for the ailing economy. The Republicans lost 49 seats and their majority in the House of Representatives; they held on to the Senate by a single vote. Trying to Rescue the Banks
To get the economy growing, Hoover wanted to increase the money supply to help banks make loans to corporations. They could then expand production and rehire workers. The president asked the Federal Reserve Board to put more currency into circulation, but the Board refused. To ease the money shortage, Hoover set up the National Credit Corporation (NCC) in October 1931. The NCC created a pool of money that allowed troubled banks to continue lending money in their communities. This program, however, failed to meet the nations needs.
In 1932 Hoover requested Congress to set up the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) to make loans to businesses. By early 1932, the RFC had lent about $238 million to banks, railroads, and building-and-loan associations. Overly cautious, the RFC failed to increase its lending sufficiently. The economy continued its decline.
Direct Help for Citizens
Hoover strongly opposed the federal governments participation in relief-money given directly to impoverished families. He believed that only state and local governments should dole out relief, with any other needs being met by private charity. By the spring of 1932, however, state and local governments were running out of money, and private charities lacked the resources to handle the crisis.
Support for a federal relief measure increased, and Congress passed the Emergency Relief and Construction Act in July. Reluctantly, Hoover signed it.
Analyzing Secondary Sources
Historians debate whether Hoover s intervention after the stock market crash was too much or insufficient, premature, or tardy. It has been argued that Hoover’s actions were responsible for the length of the Depression. Would you agree or disagree? Review the steps Hoover took to promote recovery and evaluate their effects, noting whether they were too severe or weak, or too early or late.
series a number of events that come one after another
public works projects such as highways, parks, and libraries built with public funds for public use
community people with common characteristics living in the same area
relief aid in the form of money or supplies for those in need
CAN HOOVER FIGHT THE DEPRESSION?
POLITICAL CARTOONS
While the Democratic Party donkey marches outside singing old songs, Hoover tries to deal with economic problems caused by high tariffs, depression, and drought.
Herbert Hoover reassures a farmer his scarecrow labeled "Farm Relief" will help.
Like any president during a crisis, Hoover's actions were debated in the press.
1	Drawing Conclusions How
are Hoover and the Democrats portrayed in the cartoon on the left?
2	Interpreting What does the cartoon on the right suggest about Hoover's plan to help farmers?
The Great Depression Begins 301
foreclose to take possession of a property from a mortgager because of defaults on payments
The new act called for $1.5 billion for public works and $300 million in emergency loans to the states for direct relief. For the first time in American history, the federal government was supplying direct relief funds. By this time, however, the new program could not reverse the damage that had been done.
H READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying What two major strategies did President Hoover use to promote economic recovery?
In an Angry Mood
guiding question Why did citizens try to change government policy during the Depression's early years? How did they change it?
In the months after the Wall Street crash, most Americans were resigned to bad economic news. By 1931, however, many were becoming increasingly discontent.
Hunger Marches and Protests by Farmers
In January 1931, about 500 residents of Oklahoma City looted a grocery store. The following month, hundreds of unemployed citizens smashed the windows of a Minneapolis grocery store and helped themselves to meat, produce, and canned goods. Crowds began showing up at rallies and “hunger marches” organized by the American Communist Party. On December 5, 1932, in Washington, D.C., a group of about 1,200 hunger marchers chanted, “Feed the hungry, tax the rich.” Police herded them into a cul-de-sac and denied them food and water. Some members of Congress insisted on the marchers’ right to petition their government. With that, the marchers made their way to Capitol Hill.
The hungry poor were not the only people who began to protest conditions during the Depression. During the agricultural boom that took place during World War I, many farmers had heavily mortgaged their land to pay for seed, equipment, and feed. After the war, prices sank so low that farmers began losing money. Creditors foreclosed on nearly one million farms between 1930 and 1934. They took ownership of the land and evictee families. Some farmers began destroying their crops, desperately trying to raise prices by reducing the supply. In Nebraska, farmers burned corn to heat their homes. Georgia dairy farmers blocked highways and stopped milk trucks, dumping the milk into ditches.
Farmers protest low dairy prices by destroying supply.
CRITICAL THINKING
Analyzing Primary Sources How do you think poor and hungry people might have responded to this photo?
302
The Bonus Marchers
After World War I, Congress had enacted a $1,000 bonus for each veteran, to be distributed in 1945. In 1929 Texas congressman Wright Patman introduced a bill that would authorize early payment of these bonuses. In May 1932, several hundred Oregon veterans began marching to Washington, D.C., to lobby for passage ofthe legislation. As they moved eastward, other veterans joined them until they numbered about 1,000. Wearing ragged military uniforms, they trudged along the highways or rode the rails, singing old war songs. The press termed the marchers the “Bonus Army.”
Once in Washington, the veterans camped in Hoovervilles. More veterans joined them until the Bonus Army swelled to an estimated 15,000. President Hoover acknowledged the veterans’ right to petition but refused to meet with them. When the Senate voted down the bonus bill, veterans outside the Capitol began to grumble. In a statement, Hoover said, “Congress made provision for the return home of the so-called bonus marchers who have for many weeks been given every opportunity of free assembly, free speech and free petition to the Congress.” Many returned home, but some marchers stayed on. Some lived in the camps; others squatted in vacant buildings downtown.
In late July, Hoover ordered the buildings cleared. The police tried, but when an officer panicked and fired into a crowd, killing two veterans, the secretary of war asked if he could send in army
troops. General Douglas MacArthur ignored Hoover’s orders to clear the buildings but to leave the camps alone. MacArthur sent in cavalry, infantry, and tanks to clear the camps. Soon, unarmed veterans were running away, pursued by some 700 soldiers. The soldiers teargassed stragglers and burned the shacks. National press coverage of troops assaulting veterans further harmed Hoover’s reputation and hounded him throughout the 1932 campaign.
Although Hoover failed to resolve the economic crisis, he did more than any prior president to expand the federal government’s role in the economy. The Reconstruction Finance Corporation was the first federal agency created to stimulate the economy during peacetime. The rout of the Bonus Army marchers and the lingering Depression, however, tarnished Hoover’s public image.
B READING PROGRESS CHECK
Identifying Between 1931 and 1932, what federal government programs and acts were created to promote economic recovery, and what was each intended to do?
Guards clash with Bonus Army marchers.
CRITICALTHINKING
Interpreting What do you observe about the Bonus Army's attempt to defend itself? LESSON 3 REVIEW
Reviewing Vocabulary
1.	Evaluating What was the purpose of the increased funding to public works? 16C
2.	Summarizing Why did creditors foreclose on so many farms during the Depression? 16C
Using Your Notes
3.	Analyzing Use the notes that you completed during the lesson to explain why the strategies that the Hoover administration used were successful or not successful. 16C
Answering the Guiding Questions
4.	Assessing How did President Hoover's governing philosophy influence his efforts to combat the Great Depression? 16C
5.	Describing Why and how did citizens try to change government policy during the Depression's early years? 16C
Writing Activity
ARGUMENT
Suppose that you are a World War I veteran in 1932. Write a persuasive letter to your congressman explaining why you need your bonus now, not in 1945. 16C The Great Depression Begins 303
chapter 9 Assessment

Directions: On a separate sheet of paper, answer the questions below. Make sure you read carefully and
answer all parts of the questions.
Lesson Review
Lesson 1
0 Identifying Central Issues What was the character of the stock market in the late 1920s? 16B
0 Sequencing How did speculation and buying on margin contribute to the market crash in 1929 and the coming of the Great Depression? 16B
0 Describing Describe the effect the stock market crash had on banks and identify how bank failures contributed to the coming of the Great Depression. 16B
0 Describing What is monetary policy and which organization controls monetary policy in the United States? What is the main tool the organization uses to try to regulate the American economy? 15E
0 Explaining How did the uneven distribution of income, in combination with the use of installment plans and easy credit, help cause the Great Depression? 16B
Lesson 2
0 Describing How were the characteristics and issues of the Great Depression reflected in the era's visual arts? What new visual art form rose to prominence during the Great Depression? Who were some of its best known practitioners? 25A
0 Defining What is repatriation! 14C
0 Identifying Cause and Effect What impact did the Dust Bowl have on farmers living on the Great Plains? 14A
Need Extra Help?
0 Describing Many people were poor in the 1930s, yet 60 million people went to the movies each week. Why do you think they chose to spend their limited amount of money in that way? How were the movies of the 1930s a reaction to the issues and characteristics of the Depression? 25A
0 Identifying Describe the approach that John Steinbeck used in his literature to highlight the issues and circumstances facing people during the Depression. 25A
Lesson 3
Interpreting Significance What three major initiatives did President Hoover take to help the economy of the United States? 16C
© Summarizing Describe the measures some farmers tool in an attempt to raise prices on agricultural goods. 16C
© Specifying What did the Emergency Relief and Construction Act offer, and what was its impact? 16C
© Identifying Cause and Effect What did World War I veterans do to try to get their service bonuses early, and how did the public react to it? 16C
Exploring the Essential Questions
© Analyzing Write an essay that identifies factors that contribute to change in the economy over time. The essa should be supported with your knowledge of the boomir 1920s economy and Great Depression of the 1930s. 16B.16C
0 Analyzing How do depressions affect societies? Use yo knowledge of the Great Depression to explain your answ
	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11	12	13	14	15	16
I
Go to page —1 290 ■ 291 I 292 I 294 1 293 1 297 I 295 I 296 1 297 | 297|301|30^p0V | 303 | 287 | 287j Critical Thinking
© Making Connections In the 1920s, how were interest rates connected to economic stability? What mistakes did the Federal Reserve make with interest rates and the money supply and how did its policies contribute to the coming ofthe Great Depression? 15E
(J) Drawing Conclusions Why did the Depression lead to the forced deportation of immigrants and especially large numbers of Mexican immigrants? 16C
© Identifying Cause and Effect How did runs on banks contribute to the high rate of bank failures during the Great Depression? 16B
© Finding the Main Idea Why was passing the Hawley-Smoot Tariff a major mistake by Congress? How did it affect the American economy? Why did members of
Congress think the Hawley-Smoot tariff was a good idea?
16B
© Analyzing What were the effects of widespread unemployment during the Great Depression? 16C
© Analyzing Relationships Write a paragraph explaining how the interaction between physical geographic factors and human geographic factors, including technological innovations and population growth, affected the environment and helped bring about the Dust Bowl. 12A
© Economics Explain the purpose of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) created by President Hoover. Who benefited from this program? 14C
Social Studies Skills
© Categorizing Information Many people traveled around, relocated, or permanently left the United States during the Great Depression. Categorize the kinds of movement and groups of people. Analyze how groups were similar or different from one another. 16C, 29B
© Creating Flowcharts Create a flow chart that illustrates how the different causes ofthe Great Depression interacted with each other and helped make the Depression worse. Indicate on your flow chart where the government and protestors wanted to intervene in the cycle to stop things from getting worse. 16B, 16C
© Applying Relative Chronology By Sequencing
Research popular movies ofthe 1930s, either online or at the library. Create a timeline listing popular movies produced in the 1930s. Identify each movie's theme or basic plot. What patterns do you see? What do the popular movies suggest to you about the mood ofthe American public? 2C, 25A, 29B
Analyzing Primary Sources
Read the excerpt below from a speech by Herbert Hoover then answer the following questions.
DBQ
PRIMARYSOURCE
“ You cannot extend the mastery ofthe government over the daily working life of a people without at the same time making it the master ofthe people's souls and thoughts.... Free speech does not live many hours after free industry and free commerce die.... Every step of bureaucratizing ofthe business of our country poisons the very roots of liberalism—that is, political equality, free speech, free assembly, free press, and equality of opportunity. It is the road not to more liberty, but to less liberty.»
—Herbert Hoover, from a speech delivered October 22,1928
Need Extra Help?
17	18	19	20	21	22	23	24	25	26
[Gotopage | 294 | 295 I 292 | 294 | 302 | 296 | 301 | 295 | 290 | 287 |
The Great Depression Begins 305

■5*
© Finding the Main Idea What is Hoover's main idea? Why does he think government should not interfere in the economy? Do you agree with his main idea? Write a paragraph explaining your point of view. 29A, 29B, 29G
Identifying Frame of Reference When did Hoover make this speech? Explain why that date is significant given what would happen later. Why did Hoover have reason to think he was correct at the time he gave his speech? Think
L
about both the date and Hoover's previous experiences.
29A, 29B, 29E
Analyzing Visuals
Use the map to answer the following questions

\ Idaho


'V

tf ,

Kyomirv

Dust Bowl
South
Nebras

=7/
\Topeka


Ariz'



Mevy/Mexico
di
BH
Areas of severest wind erosion, 1935-1938 I I Area of severe wind erosion, 1935-1936 I I
Area of severe wind erosion, 1938 I	|	Area of severe wind erosion, 1940
I I
Other areas of severe wind erosion, 1935-1938 ¥


City.
3ktaho$r
N

4


Analyzing Geographic Patterns and Distributions
When you look at the severity and the length of time, which regions in which states suffered the worst effects of the Dust Bowl for the longest period of time? 12A, 31B
O
Posing Questions about Geographic Patterns Although many farmers moved to nearby cities to escape the Dust Bowl, a large number migrated to California.
What questions do you need to pose to identify the route most of them followed and to explain why they made such a long trip? 12A,31B
Need Extra Help?
© Analyzing Visuals What purpose did the writing found on the side of this Bonus Army car serve? 29A
© Interpreting Why do you think this image would be effective in gaining support for the bonus bill? 29A
Extended Response Question
© Summarizing Write a summary of how the Great Depression affected the U.S. economy. Be sure to describe new government programs that were implemented, as well as the Depression's effects on workers and businesses. 16C
Standardized Test Practice
© Which ofthe following was a root cause ofthe Great Depression? 16B
A prohibiting the sale of alcohol B the low tariff policy passed by Congress C the bull market in stocks D the Federal Reserve's policy of low interest rates
© Drought and.
brought about the
conditions that caused the Dust Bowl. 12A
F overgrazing of cattle G the near extinction ofthe buffalo H famine
J poor farming practices
I
Coto page | 294 | 294 | 287 [ 287 | 287 I 287 I 2X7 I 06
Roosevelt and the New Deal
networks
There's More Online about Roosevelt and the New Deal.
1933-1941
• (an the government fix the economy? s economic well-being of its citizens?

CHAPTER
Lesson 1
The First New Deal
10
Lesson 2
The Second New Deal
Lesson 3
The New Deal Coalition

The Story Matters...
The Great Depression had changed the lives of many Americans. Millions had lost their jobs, their savings, and their homes. Democrat Franklin Delano Roosevelt offered hope and relief in the presidential election of 1932. In his first hundred days in office, he sent bill after bill to Congress. This legislation became known as the New Deal. It included an array of programs and laws designed to rejuvenate the American economy and prevent such an economic disaster from reoccurring.
◄ Franklin D. Roosevelt, a Democrat, shared a progressive attitude with his famous cousin, President Theodore Roosevelt, a Republican.
PHOTO:
Bettmann/CORBIS 307
