Why did Paleo-Indians
 migrate to the Americas?

European Civilization
 in Turmoil p. 10

 How did economic and political changes in Europe facilitate overseas expansion?

Columbus and
 the Columbian Exchange p. 16

What was the Columbian
Exchange, and how did
 it affect societies in the Americas and Europe?

West African
Worlds p. 20


 What were the chief similarities and differences between the civilizations of Africa and the Americas?

European
Colonization of the
Atlantic World p. 24


 How did the different labor systems employed by the Spanish, French, and English affect the indigenous populations of the Americas?

C HAPTER

The First
Americans p. 4




 Hear the Audio File on myhistorylab.com Watch the Video Critical Visions, Chapter 1

People in Motion
The Atlantic World to 1590
 To the people who had lived in the Americas for millennia, the idea that theirs was a “New World” would have seemed strange. Scientists continue to debate when the first people arrived in the Americas from Asia, but estimates range from between 40,000 and 14,000 years ago. In the millennia that followed, the peoples of the Americas fanned out and established a range of societies. Yet to the Europeans who arrived in the Americas toward the end of the fifteenth century, America was indeed a “brave new world,” as William Shakespeare wrote, inhabited by exotic plants, animals, and peoples. In images and words Europeans portrayed this extraordinary land in the most fantastic terms. Some accounts spoke of America as an Eden-like earthly paradise inhabited by good-natured, but primitive, peoples. Others emphasized themes like those featured in this engraving, Amerigo Vespucci Awakens a Sleeping America. Vespucci, an Italian-Spanish navigator from whose first name the New World came to be called the Americas, gazes upon a naked native woman rising from her hammock. Her nudity symbolizes the wild sexuality Europeans believed characterized the native inhabitants of the Americas. The cannibals behind her, devouring human flesh, represent savagery, a second prominent element of the European vision of the New World. Neither vision of the Americas was accurate, but both would greatly complicate Europeans’ understanding of the American civilizations they encountered, leading to a legacy of violence, exploitation, and conquest. The European arrival in the Americas was part of a process of exploration and colonization pursued primarily by Portugal, Spain, France, and England. This impulse was driven both by a hunger for riches as well as by profound changes in European society, religion, economics, and politics brought on by the Renaissance and Reformation. Africa was eventually drawn into this vast trading network encompassing the entire Atlantic world. Colonization almost always involved the severe exploitation of native peoples, including dispossession of land and coerced labor. Eventually Europeans turned to the international slave trade and the labor of enslaved Africans to draw the wealth from the mines and fields of the New World.

 “Your Magnificence must know that herein they are so inhuman that they outdo every custom (even) of beasts; for they eat all their enemies whom they kill or capture . . . and are libidinous beyond measure.” AMERIGO VESPUCCI, 1497


