 110  CHAPTER 3  Colonial Ways of Life

 indentured servants or slaves. During the eighteenth century, England would transport some 50,000 convicts to the North American colonies to relieve overcrowded jails and provide needed workers. Once in America, many of the newcomers kept moving within and across colonies in search of better lands or new business opportunities, such as trading with the native peoples who controlled the profitable fur trade. This extraordinary mosaic of adventurous people created America’s enduring institutions and values, as well as its distinctive spirit and restless energy.

The Shape of Early America
 Life in early America was hard and often short. Many in the first wave of American colonists died of disease or starvation; others were killed by Native Americans. The average death rate in the first years of settlement was 50 percent. Once colonial life became more settled and secure, however, the colonies grew rapidly. On average, the American population doubled every ­twenty-​­five years during the colonial period. By 1750, the number of colonists had passed 1 million; by 1775, it approached 2.5 million. By comparison, the combined population of England, Scotland, and Ireland in 1750 was 6.5 million.

 population growth

 Benjamin Franklin, a keen observer of life in the new country, said that the extraordinary growth in the colonial population came about because land was plentiful and cheap, and laborers were scarce and expensive. The opposite conditions prevailed in Europe. It suffered from overpopulation and expensive farmland. From this reversal of conditions flowed many of the changes that European culture underwent during the colonization of ­America—​­not the least being that more land and good fortune lured enterprising immigrants and led settlers to replenish the earth with large families. Once in the colonies, settlers tended to have large families, in part because farm children could lend a hand in the fields. Colonists tended to marry and start families at an earlier age than in Europe. In England, the average age at marriage for women was ­twenty-​­five or ­twenty-​ ­six; in America, it dropped to twenty. Men in the colonies also married at a younger age. The birth rate rose accordingly, since women who married earlier had time for about two additional pregnancies during their childbearing years. On average, a married woman had a child every two to three years before menopause. Some women had as many as 20 pregnancies over their lifetime, making for large families. Benjamin Franklin, for example, had sixteen brothers and sisters.

The Shape of Early America  111


 Birthing children, however, was also dangerous, since most babies were delivered at home in often unsanitary conditions and harsh weather. Miscarriages were common. Between 25 and 50 percent of women died during birthing or soon thereafter, and almost a quarter of all babies did not survive infancy, especially during the early stages of a colonial settlement. Each year, more deaths occurred among young children than any other age group. Disease and epidemics were rampant in colonial America. In 1713, Boston minister Cotton Mather lost three of his children and his wife to a measles epidemic. (Mather lost eight of fifteen children in their first year of life.) Martha Custis, the Virginia widow who married George Washington, had four children during her first marriage, all of whom died young, at ages two, three, sixteen, and seventeen. Overall, however, mortality rates in the colonies were lower than in Europe. Because fertile land was plentiful, famine seldom occurred after the early years of settlement, and, although the winters were more severe than in England, firewood was abundant. The average age in the new nation in 1790 was sixteen years; because the colonial population was younger on the Colonial farm This plan of a newly cleared farm shows how trees were cut ­whole, ​­Americans, as a group, were less down and the stumps left to rot. susceptible to disease than were Europeans. Colonists’ longevity reflected the different living conditions in America. The majority of colonists lived in sparsely populated settlements and were less likely to be exposed to infectious diseases. That began to change, of course, as colonial cities grew larger and more congested, and trade and travel increased. By the ­mid–​­eighteenth century, the colonies were beginning to see levels of contagion much like those in the cities of Europe.

Women in the Colonies
 In contrast to the colonies of New Spain and New France, English America had far more women, which largely explains the difference in population growth rates among the European empires competing in the Americas. More

 112  CHAPTER 3  Colonial Ways of Life

 women did not mean more equality, however. Most colonists brought to America deeply rooted convictions about the inferiority of women. As one New England minister stressed, “the woman is a weak creature not endowed with [the] strength and constancy of mind [of men].” Women, as had been true for centuries, were expected to focus their time and talents on what was then called the “domestic sphere.” They were to obey and serve their husbands, nurture their children, and maintain their households. Governor John Winthrop insisted that a “true wife” would find contentment only “in subjection to her husband’s authority.” The wife’s role, said another Puritan, was “to guide the house etc. and not guide the husband.” A wife should view her spouse with “a noble but generous Fear, which proceeds from Love.” Women in most colonies could not vote, hold office, attend schools or colleges, bring lawsuits, sign contracts, or become ministers. Divorces were usually granted only for desertion or “cruel and barbarous treatment,” and no matter who was named the “guilty party,” the father received custody of the children. A Pennsylvania court did see fit to send a man to prison for throwing a loaf of hard bread at his wife, “which occasioned her Death in a short Time.”

 “women’s work”

 Virtually every member of a household, regardless of age or gender, worked, and no one was expected to work harder than women. As John Cotton, a Boston minister, admitted in 1699, “women are creatures without which there is no Comfortable living for a man.” Women who failed to perform the work expected of them were punished as if they were servants or slaves. In 1643, Margaret Page of Salem, Massachusetts, was jailed “for being a lazy, idle, loitering person.” During the eighteenth century, women’s work typically involved activities in the house, garden, and fields. Unmarried women often worked outside their home. Many moved into other households to help with children or to make clothes. Others stayed at home but took in children or spun thread into yarn to exchange for cloth. Still others hired themselves out as apprentices to learn a skilled trade or craft. Throughout colonial America, there were women silversmiths, blacksmiths, shoemakers, sailmakers, shopkeepers, and mill owners. Other women operated laundries or bakeries. Technically, any money earned by a married woman was the property of her husband. Farm women usually rose and prepared breakfast by sunrise and went to bed soon after dark. They were responsible for building the fire and hauling water from a well or creek. They fed and watered the livestock, woke the children, churned butter, tended the garden, prepared lunch (the main meal of the

The Shape of Early America  113


 The First, Second, and Last Scene of Mortality Prudence Punderson’s needlework (ca. 1776) shows the domestic path, from cradle to coffin, followed by most affluent colonial women.

 day), played with the children, worked the garden again, prepared dinner, milked the cows, got the children ready for bed, and cleaned the kitchen before retiring. Women also combed, spun, spooled, wove, and bleached wool for clothing; knitted linen and cotton, hemmed sheets, pieced quilts; made candles and soap; chopped wood, hauled water, mopped floors, and washed clothes. Female indentured servants in the southern colonies commonly worked as field hands, weeding, hoeing, and harvesting. Meals in colonial America differed according to ethnic groups. The English focused their diet on boiled or broiled ­meats—​­venison, mutton, beef, and pork. Meals were often cooked in one large cast iron pot, combining “stew meat” with potatoes and vegetables which were then smothered with butter and seasoned with salt. Puddings made of bread or plums were the favorite dessert, while beer with just a little alcohol content was the most common beverage, even for children and infants. Cooking was usually done over a large open fireplace. The greatest accidental killer of women was kitchen fires that ignited long dresses.

 114  CHAPTER 3  Colonial Ways of Life

 One of the most lucrative trades among colonial women was the oldest: prostitution. Many servants took up prostitution after their indenture was fulfilled, and the colonial port cities had thriving brothels. They catered to sailors and soldiers, but men from all walks of life, married and unmarried, frequented what were called “bawdy houses,” or, in Puritan Boston, “disorderly houses.” Virginia’s William Byrd, perhaps the wealthiest man in the colony, complained in his diary that he had walked the streets of Williamsburg trying to “pick up a Whore, but could not find one.” Local authorities frowned on such activities. In Massachusetts, convicted prostitutes were stripped to the waist, tied to the back of a cart, and whipped as it moved through the town. In South Carolina, several elected public officials were dismissed because they were caught “lying with wenches.” New York City officials ordered raids on brothels in 1753. Some two dozen “ladies of pleasure” were arrested, and five of them were subjected to a public whipping. Some enslaved women whose owners expected sexual favors turned the tables by demanding compensation. On occasion, circumstances forced women to exercise leadership outside the domestic sphere. Such was the case with South Carolinian Elizabeth Lucas Pinckney (1722–1793). Born in the West Indies, raised on the island of Antigua, and educated in England, “Eliza” moved with her family to Charleston, South Carolina, at age fifteen, when her father, George Lucas, inherited three plantations. The following year, however, Lucas, a British army officer and colonial administrator, was called back to Antigua, leaving Eliza to care for her ailing mother and younger s­ister—​­and to manage three plantations worked by slaves. She wrote a friend in England, “I have the business of three plantations to transact, which requires much writing and more business and fatigue . . . [but] by rising early I find I can go through much business.” Eliza loved the “vegetable world,” and experimented with several crops ­ uch-​­coveted before focusing on indigo, a West Indian plant that produced a m blue dye for coloring fabric, especially military uniforms. Indigo made her family a fortune, as it did for many other plantation owners on the Carolina coast. In 1744, she married Charles Pinckney, a widower twice her age, who was speaker of the South Carolina Assembly. She made him promise that she could continue to manage the plantation. As Eliza began raising children, she “resolved to make a good wife to my dear husband . . . ​a good mother to my children . . . ​a good mistress to my servants [making] their lives as comfortable as I can.” She also pledged “not to be luxurious or extravagant in the management of my table [family budget] and family on the one hand, nor niggardly and covetous, or too anxiously concerned about it on the other.”

The Shape of Early America  115


 In the towns, women commonly served as tavern hostesses and shopkeepers and occasionally worked as doctors, printers, upholsterers, painters, and silversmiths. Often, these women were widows carrying on their dead ­husbands’ trade or business, and they became accustomed to some measure of social authority in a “man’s world.”

 women and religion During the colonial era, no denomination allowed women to be ordained as ministers. Only the Quakers let women hold church offices and preach (exhort) in public. Puritans cited biblical passages claiming that God required “virtuous” women to submit to male authority and remain “silent” in congregational matters. Governor John Winthrop demanded that women “not meddle in such things as are proper for men” to manage. Women who challenged ministerial authority were usually prosecuted and punished. Yet by the eighteenth century, as is true today, women made up the overwhelming majority of church members. Their disproportionate attendance at church services and revivals worried many ministers, since a feminized church was presumed to be a church in decline. In 1692, the influential Boston minister Cotton Mather observed that there “are far more Godly Women in the world than there are Godly Men.” In explaining this phenomenon, Mather put a new twist on the old notion of women being the weaker sex. He argued that the pain associated with childbirth, which had long been interpreted as the penalty women paid for Eve’s sinfulness, was in part what drove women “more frequently, & the more fervently” to commit their lives to Christ. In colonial America, the religious roles of black women were quite different from those of their white counterparts. In most West African tribes, women were not subordinate to men and frequently served as priests and cult leaders. Although some enslaved Africans had been exposed to Christianity or Islam in Africa, most of them tried to sustain their traditional African religion once they arrived in the colonies. In America, black women (and men) were often excluded from church membership for fear that Christianized slaves might seek to gain their freedom. To clarify the situation, Virginia in 1667 passed a law specifying that children of slaves would be slaves even if they had been baptized as Christians. Over time, the colonial environment did generate slight improvements in the ­status of women. The acute shortage of women in the early years made them more highly valued than they were in Europe, and the Puritan emphasis on a w ­ ell-​­ordered family life led to laws protecting wives from physical abuse and allowing for divorce. In addition, colonial laws gave wives greater control

 116  CHAPTER 3  Colonial Ways of Life

 over property that they had contributed to a marriage or that was left after a husband’s death. But the a­ ge-​­old notion of female subordination and domesticity remained firmly entrenched in colonial America. As a Massachusetts boy maintained in 1662, the superior aspect of life was “masculine and eternal; the feminine inferior and mortal.”

Society and Economy
 in the Southern Colonies As the southern colonies matured, inequalities of wealth became more visible, and social life grew more divided. The use of enslaved Indians and Africans to grow and process the crops most in demand in Europe generated enormous wealth for a few large landowners and their families. Socially, the planters and merchants increasingly became a class apart from the “common folk.” They dominated the legislatures, bought luxury goods from London and Paris, and built brick mansions with formal ­gardens—​­all the while looking down upon their social “inferiors,” both white and black. Warm weather and plentiful rainfall enabled the southern colonies to grow the staple crops (most profitable; also called cash crops) valued by the mother country: tobacco, rice, sugarcane, and indigo. Virginia, as King Charles I put it, was “founded upon smoke.” Tobacco production soared during the seventeenth century. “In Virginia and Maryland,” wrote a royal official in 1629, “tobacco . . . ​is our All, and indeed leaves no room for anything else.” The same was true for rice cultivation in South Carolina and Georgia. Using only hand tools, slaves transformed the coastal landscapes, removing trees from swamps and wetlands infested with snakes, alligators, and mosquitos. They then created a system of floodgates to allow workers to drain or flood the fields as needed. Over time, the rice planters became the wealthiest group in the British colonies. As plantations grew in size, the demand for enslaved laborers, first Native Americans, and later Africans, rose dramatically. The first English immigrants to Virginia and Maryland (the Chesapeake colonies) built primitive ­one-​­room huts with dirt floors and little privacy. They provided limited protection from the cold and wind and rotted quickly. A visitor to Virginia in 1622 reported that the colony’s huts “were the worst I ever saw.” Eventually, colonists built sparsely furnished cabins on stone or brick foundations roofed with thatched straw. The spaces between the log timbers were “chinked” with “wattle and daub”—a mix of mud, sand, straw, and wooden stakes that when dried formed a sturdy wall or seam. There were few furnishings in most colonial homes. Because most of the huts or cabins were

Society and Economy in New England  117


 Virginia plantation wharf Southern colonial plantations were often constructed along rivers, with easy access to oceangoing vessels, as shown on this 1730 tobacco label.

 too small for beds, residents slept on the floor and used blankets to keep warm. Rarely did they have glass to fill windows. Instead, they simply used wooden shutters to cover the openings.

Society and Economy in New England
 Environmental, social, and economic factors contributed to the remarkable diversity among the early American colonies. New England was quite different from the southern and middle Atlantic regions: ­more-​­governed by religious concerns, less focused on commercial agriculture, ­more-​­engaged in trade, and much less involved with slavery.

 townships

 Whenever New England towns were founded, the first ­public structure built was usually a church. By law, every town had to collect taxes to support a church, and every r­ esident—​­whether a church member or

 118  CHAPTER 3  Colonial Ways of Life

 ­ ot—​­was required to attend midweek and Sunday religious services. The avern age New Englander heard 7,000 sermons in a lifetime. The Puritans believed that God had created a covenant, or contract, in which people formed a congregation for common worship. This led to the idea of people joining together to form governments, but the principles of democracy were not part of Puritan political thought. Puritan leaders sought to do the will of God, not to follow the will of the people, and the ultimate source of authority was not majority rule but the Bible as interpreted by ministers and magistrates (political leaders). Unlike the settlers in the southern colonies or in Dutch New York, few New England colonists received huge tracts of land. Township grants were usually awarded to organized groups of settlers, often already gathered into a church congregation. They would request from the General Court a “town” (what elsewhere was commonly called a township). They then divided the land according to a rough principle of equity. Those who invested more or had larger families or greater status might receive more land, while the town retained some pasture and woodland in common and held other tracts for later arrivals.

 dwellings and daily life

 The first colonists in New England initially lived in caves, tents, or cabins, but they soon built simple w ­ ood-​­frame

 Housing in colonial New England This frame house, built in the 1670s, belonged to Rebecca Nurse, one of the women hanged as a witch in Salem Village in 1692.

Society and Economy in New England  119


 houses. The roofs were steeply pitched to reduce the buildup of snow and were covered with thatched grasses or reeds. By the end of the seventeenth century, most New England homes were plain but sturdy dwellings centered on a fireplace. Some had glass windows brought from England. Interior walls were often plastered and whitewashed, but it was not until the eighteenth century that the exteriors of most houses were painted, usually a deep “Indian” red. The interiors were dark, illuminated by candles or oil lamps, both of which were expensive; out of practicality, most people usually went to sleep soon after sunset. Family life revolved around the main room on the ground floor, called the hall, where meals were cooked in a large fireplace and where the family lived most of the time (hence, they came to be called living rooms). Food would be served at a table of r­ ough-​­hewn planks, called the board. The father was sometimes referred to as the “chair man” because he sat in the only chair (the origin of the term chairman of the board). The rest of the family usually stood or sat on stools or benches and ate with their hands and wooden spoons. Forks were not introduced until the eighteenth century. A typical meal consisted of corn, boiled meat, and vegetables washed down with beer, cider, rum, or milk. Cornbread was a daily favorite, as was cornmeal mush, known as hasty pudding.

 the new england economy

 Early New England farmers and their families led hard lives. Clearing rocks from the g­ lacier-​­scoured soil might require sixty days of hard labor per acre. The growing season was short, and no staple crops for sale in markets grew in the harsh climate. The crops and livestock were those familiar to the English countryside: wheat, barley, oats, some cattle, pigs, and sheep. Many New Englanders turned to the sea for their livelihood. Codfish had been a regular element of the European diet for centuries, and the waters off the New England coast had the heaviest concentrations of cod in the world. Whales, too, abounded in New England waters. They supplied oil for lighting and lubrication, as well as ambergris, a waxy substance used in the manufacture of perfumes. New Englanders exported dried fish to Europe, with lesser grades going to the West Indies as food for slaves. The thriving fishing industry encouraged the development of shipbuilding, and the growing experience and expertise at seafaring spurred transatlantic commerce. Rising incomes and a booming trade with Britain and Europe soon brought a taste for luxury goods in New England that clashed with the Puritan ideal of plain living and high thinking. In 1714, a worried Puritan deplored the “great extravagance that people are

 120  CHAPTER 3  Colonial Ways of Life

 fallen into, far beyond their circumstances, in their purchases, buildings, families, expenses, apparel, generally in the whole way of living.”

 shipbuilding

 The abundant forests of New England represented a source of enormous wealth. ­Old-​­growth trees were especially prized for use as ships’ masts and spars (on which sails were attached). Early on, the British government claimed the tallest and straightest American trees, mostly white pines and oaks, for use by the Royal Navy. At the same time, British officials encouraged the colonists to develop their own shipbuilding industry. ­American-​­built ships quickly became known for their quality and price. It was much less expensive to purchase ships built in America than to transport American timber to Britain for ship construction, especially since a large ship might require as many as Profitable fisheries Catching, curing, 2,000 trees. Nearly a third of all British and drying codfish in Newfoundland in ships were made in the colonies. the early 1700s. For centuries, the rich fishing grounds of the North Atlantic provided New Englanders with a prosperous industry.

 trade By the end of the seventeenth century, the New England colonies had become part of a complex North Atlantic commercial network, trading not only with the British Isles and the British West Indies but ­also—​­often ­illegally—​­with Spain, France, Portugal, the Netherlands, and their colonies. Trade in New England and the middle colonies differed from that in the South in two respects: their lack of staple crops to exchange for English goods was a relative disadvantage, but the success of shipping and commercial ­enterprises worked in their favor. After 1660, to protect its agriculture and fisheries, the English government placed prohibitive duties (taxes) on fish, flour, wheat, and meat, while leaving the door open to timber, furs, and whale oil, products in great demand in the home country. Between 1698 and 1717, New England and New York bought more from England than they exported to it, creating an unfavorable trade balance, as more of their coins went out than came in. These circumstances gave rise to the triangular trade, in which New Englanders, for example, shipped rum to the west coast of Africa, where it was

Society and Economy in New England  121


 es

ATLANTIC TRADE ROUTES

 h o rs

NORTH AMERICA

 s,

 ves mo , mola n ey , s u sse s ga r

Sl a


Fis h, l iv es t ock
 fl o u r, l u m b e r

Sl a v e s
 CUBA

 en FRANCE Lin s e r o t s l a v a s EUROPE d o o Fi s h , f urs, n g d e r M a nufactu PORTUGAL SPAIN d goods i ns Man uf act ure Lisbon o, sk indi g , e To b a c c o AZORES c i R Cadiz M e a t , fi s h , r u m , l u m b e r, g r a i n Ma nuf ac t ur e d g o od s Wi ne MADEIRA AT L A N T I C Win e fr ui t

 NEWFOUNDLAND

Boston
New York
Philadelphia
Charleston


Glasgow
ENGLAND
Bristol London NETHERLANDS 
Su


 JAMAICA

 ga

 mo r,

 la

 e ss

 s,

 fr u

 it Eu

 ea rop

 ro np

 du c

 ts

 AFRICA

 HISPANIOLA

 OCEAN

WEST INDIES

Sla
R u ve s
 m

Sla v


SL AV EC GO OA IVO LD ST RY CO CO AS AS T T

 es

SOUTH AMERICA

 Major trade routes Intercoastal trade routes ■

 How was overseas trade in the South different from that in New England and

■


 What were North America’s most important exports?

WWN64
America 10e the middle colonies? 26593_03map_01 ■ What was the “triangular trade”? First proof 
 exchanged for slaves; took the enslaved Africans to the West Indies to sell; and returned home with various West Indian commodities, including molasses, from which New Englanders then manufactured rum. In another version, they shipped provisions to the West Indies, carried sugar and molasses to England, and returned with goods manufactured in Europe.

 the devil in new england The Puritans who settled New England were religious fundamentalists who looked to the Bible for authority and inspiration. They read the Bible daily and memorized much of it. Yet at times, religious zeal could get out of hand. The strains of Massachusetts’s

 122  CHAPTER 3  Colonial Ways of Life

 t­ ransition from Puritan utopia to royal colony reached a tragic climax in 1692 amid the witchcraft hysteria at Salem Village, some fifteen miles north of Boston. Belief in witchcraft was widespread throughout Europe and the colonies in the seventeenth century. Prior to the dramatic episode in Salem, almost 300 New Englanders (mostly m ­ iddle-​­aged women) had been accused of practicing witchcraft, and more than 30 had been hanged. The Salem episode was unique in its scope and intensity, however. During the winter of 1691–1692, several adolescent girls became fascinated with the fortune telling and voodoo practiced by Tituba, a slave from Barbados. The entranced girls began to behave ­oddly—​­shouting, barking, crawling, and twitching for no apparent reason. When asked who was tormenting them, the girls replied that three ­women—​­Tituba, Sarah Good, and Sarah ­Osborne—​ ­were Satan’s servants. The Reverend Samuel Parris, whose daughter claimed to be bewitched, beat Tituba, his slave, until she confessed. Authorities then arrested Tituba and the other accused women. Two of them were hanged, but not before they named other supposed witches in the village and more young girls experienced inexplicable fits. Soon the wild accusations spread, and within a few months, the Salem Village jail was filled with more than 150 men, women, and ­children—​­all accused of practicing witchcraft. When a prominent farmer, Giles Corey, was accused of supernatural crimes, his neighbors lowered him into an open grave, placed a board over his body, and began loading it with heavy boulders to force a confession. After three days of such abuse, the defiant old man finally succumbed, having muttered only two words: “more weight!” By denying guilt and choosing death, Corey ensured that his estate would go to his son rather than be confiscated by the government. That convicted witches forfeited their property, which was then put up for sale, revealed the practical benefits and ­self-​­interested motives behind some of the accusations. As the allegations and executions multiplied, leaders of the Massachusetts Bay Colony began to worry that the witch hunts were out of control. The governor finally intervened when his own wife was accused of serving the devil. He disbanded the special court in Salem and ordered the remaining suspects released, including Tituba, who had languished in jail for thirteen months. By then, nineteen people (including some men married to women who had been convicted) had been ­hanged—​­all justified by the Biblical verse that tells believers not to “suffer a witch to live.” A year after it had begun, the witchcraft frenzy was finally over.

Society and Economy in the Middle Colonies  123


 What explains Salem’s mass hysteria? It may have represented nothing more than theatrical adolescents trying to enliven the dreary routine of everyday life. Some historians have stressed that most of the accused witches were women, many of whom had in some way defied the traditional roles assigned to females. Still another interpretation suggests that the accusations may have reflected the panicky atmosphere caused by frequent Indian attacks occurring just north of Salem, along New England’s northern frontier. Some of the accusing girls had seen their families killed by Indians. Whatever its actual causes, the witchcraft controversy also reflected the peculiar social tensions and personal feuds in Salem Village. Late in 1692, as the hysteria subsided, several girls were traveling through nearby Ipswich when they encountered an old woman. “A witch!” they shouted and began writhing as if possessed. But the people of Ipswich showed no interest, and the “bewitched” girls picked themselves up and continued on their way.

The Wonders of the Invisible
 World Title page of the 1693 London edition of Cotton Mather’s account of the Salem witchcraft trials. Mather, a prominent Boston minister, warned his congregation that the devil’s legions were assaulting New England.

Society and Economy
 in the Middle Colonies Both geographically and culturally, the middle colonies (New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, and Maryland) stood between New England and the South. They reflected the diversity of colonial life and foreshadowed the pluralism of the future nation.

 an economic mix

 The middle colonies produced surpluses of foodstuffs for export to the s­lave-​­based plantations of the South and the West Indies: wheat, barley, oats, and other grains, flour, and livestock. Three great

 124  CHAPTER 3  Colonial Ways of Life

 r­ ivers—​­the Hudson, the Delaware, and the S­ usquehanna—​­and their tributaries provided access to the backcountry of Pennsylvania and New York, which opened up a rich fur trade with Native Americans. The region’s bustling commerce thus rivaled that of New England. Land policies in the middle colonies followed the headright system prevalent in the Chesapeake colonies. In New York, the early royal governors continued the Dutch device of the patroonship, granting to influential men (called “patroons”) vast estates on Long Island and throughout the Hudson and Mohawk Valleys north of New York City. The patroons controlled large domains farmed by tenants (renters) who paid fees to use the landlords’ mills, warehouses, smokehouses, and docks. With free land available elsewhere, however, New York’s population languished, and the new waves of immigrants sought the promised land of Pennsylvania.

 an ethnic mix

 In the makeup of their population, the middle colonies differed from both New England’s Puritan settlements and the biracial plantation colonies to the south. In New York and New Jersey, Dutch culture and language lingered. Along the Delaware River near Philadelphia, the first ­settlers—​­Swedes and ­Finns—​­were overwhelmed by an influx of Europeans. By the ­mid–​­eighteenth century, the middle colonies were the ­fastest-​­growing region in North America. The Germans came to America (primarily Pennsylvania) mainly from the Rhineland region of Europe, which had suffered from brutal religious wars that pitted Protestants against Catholics. William Penn’s recruiting brochures in German translation circulated throughout central Europe, and his promise of religious freedom appealed to many persecuted sects, especially the Mennonites, German Baptists whose beliefs resembled those of the Quakers. In 1683, a group of Mennonites founded Germantown, near Philadelphia. They represented the first wave of German migrants, a large proportion of whom paid their way as indentured servants, or “redemptioners.” The large numbers of penniless German immigrants during the eighteenth century alarmed many English colonists. Benjamin Franklin worried that the Germans “will soon . . . ​outnumber us.” Throughout the eighteenth century, the ­Scots-​­Irish moved still farther out into the Pennsylvania backcountry. (“­Scotch-​­Irish” is the more common but inaccurate name for the ­Scots-​­Irish, a mostly Presbyterian population transplanted from Scotland to northern Ireland by the English government a century earlier to give Catholic Ireland a more Protestant tone.). Land was the great magnet attracting the poor ­Scots-​­Irish immigrants. They were, said a recruiting agent, “full of expectation to have land for ­nothing” and

MAJOR IMMIGRANT GROUPS IN COLONIAL AMERICA
Quebec 
C


E
Q U E B


 ive r

NEW HAMPSHIRE

Lake
Champlain


 u ctic ne

NEW YORK

Boston
F


 o

L


Er


 ke

F
De
 law

Susque
River


A P
P A
L A C
H I A
N


Ri
 ve r

La
Ohio


Newport


F
F
Riv
 er

 PENNSYLVANIA

J
New York 

NEW JERSEY

J
W
Philadelphia S S


Baltimore


 DELAWARE

 VIRGINIA

Chesapeake
Bay


Shenandoah River


Richmond F


James River


Williamsburg


NORTH
New BernF CAROLINA Fayetteville W Charlotte 
F
R


F
Charleston
J


 r ive

 GEORGIA

J
Savannah 

 FLORIDA (Spanish)

■


ATLANTIC OCEAN

 MARYLAND

Potomac
River


Sav
 an nah

■


Cape
Cod


J RHODE ISLAND

SOUTH CAROLINA

■


200 Miles
200 Kilometers


 CONNECTICUT

 are

 n han a

 ie

 n e O

 iver

River
Mohawk


 iver

M O
U N
T A
I N S


 tR

 i

 nR dso Hu

 ak

 r ta



 MASSACHUSETTS

 n Co

Law
 ren ce R



Augusta


Montreal


St.




 MAINE (Mass.)

English
Africans
Scots-Irish
German
Dutch
Highland Scots
French Catholics
J
Jews S
Swedes W
Welsh F
French Huguenots 

 What attracted German immigrants to the middle colonies? Why did the ­Scots-​­Irish spread across the Appalachian backcountry? Where did the first Jews settle in America? How were they received? WWN64 America 10e 26593_03map_02 First proof

 126  CHAPTER 3  Colonial Ways of Life

 were “unwilling to be disappointed.” In most cases, the lands they “squatted on” were claimed by Native Americans. In 1741, a group of Delaware Indians protested to Pennsylvania authorities that the S­ cots-​­Irish intruders were taking “our land” without giving “us anything for it.” If the colonial government did not stop the flow of whites, the Delawares threatened, then they would “drive them off.” The ­Scots-​­Irish and the Germans became the largest n ­ on-​­English ethnic groups in the colonies. Other ethnic minorities also enriched the population in the middle colonies: Huguenots (French Protestants whose religious freedom had been revoked in 1685, forcing many to leave France), Irish, Welsh, Swiss, and Jews. New York had inherited from the Dutch a tradition of ethnic and religious tolerance, which had given the colony a diverse population before the English conquest: ­French-​­speaking Walloons (a Celtic people of southern Belgium), French, Germans, Danes, Portuguese, Spaniards, Italians, Bohemians, Poles, and others, including some New England Puritans.

 the backcountry

 Pennsylvania became the great distribution point for the different ethnic groups of European origin, just as the Chesapeake Bay region and Charleston, South Carolina, became the distribution points for African peoples. Before the ­mid–​­eighteenth century, settlers in the Pennsylvania backcountry had trespassed across Indian lands and reached the Appalachian mountain range. Rather than crossing the steep ridges, the ­Scots-​­Irish and Germans filtered southward down the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia and on into the Carolina and Georgia backcountry. Germans were the first white settlers in the Upper Shenandoah Valley in southern Pennsylvania, western Maryland, and northern Virginia, and S­ cots-​­Irish filled the lower valley in western Virginia and North Carolina. Feisty, determined, and rugged, the German and ­Scots-​­Irish settlers built cabins and tended farms on Indian lands, built evangelical churches, and established contentious isolated communities along the frontier of settlement.

 ­R ace-​­Based Slavery The institution of slavery is central to the history of the American colonies. During the late seventeenth century, slavery was legalized in all the colonies but was most prevalent in the South. White colonists viewed ­race-​­based ­slavery as a normal aspect of everyday life in an imperfect world; few c­ onsidered it a moral issue. They believed that God determined one’s “station in life.” Slavery

­Race-​­Based Slavery  127


 was therefore not a social evil but a “personal misfortune” dictated by God. Not until the late eighteenth century did large numbers of white Europeans and Americans begin to raise ethical questions about slavery. Initially, during the seventeenth century, many of the first Africans in America were treated like indentured servants, with a limited term of service, after which they gained their freedom. Antonio, an African, arrived in Jamestown during the early 1620s and worked as a servant for fourteen years before gaining his freedom. He thereafter married an African woman, changed his name to Anthony Johnson, and developed a substantial farm of his own along the Virginia shore. Until the ­mid–​­seventeenth century, no laws in the colonies specified the meaning and scope of the word “slavery.” Gradually, however, ­life-​­long slavery for blacks became the c­ ustom—​­and the l­aw—​­of the land. By the 1660s, colonial legislatures had begun to legalize the institution of r­ ace-​­based slavery, with detailed slave codes regulating most aspects of their lives. The South Carolina code, for example, defined all “Negroes, Mulattoes, and Indians” sold into bondage as slaves for life, as were the children born of enslaved mothers. In 1667, the Virginia legislature declared that slaves could not serve on juries, travel without permission, or gather in groups of more than two or three. Some colonies even prohibited owners from freeing their slaves (manumission). The codes allowed owners to punish slaves by whipping them, slitting their noses, cutting their ankle cords, castrating men, or killing them. In 1713, a South Carolina planter punished a slave by closing him up in a tiny coffin to die, only to have his son slip in a knife so that he could kill himself rather than await suffocation.

 color prejudice More than a century before the English arrived in America, the Portuguese and Spanish had established a global trade in enslaved Africans (in Spanish, the word negro means “black”). While English settlers often enslaved Indian captives, as had the Spanish and Portuguese before them, the Europeans did not enslave other Europeans who were captured in warfare. Color was the crucial difference, or at least the crucial rationalization used to justify the institution of slavery and its hellish brutalities. The English associated the color black with darkness and evil. To them, the different appearance, behavior, and customs of Africans and Native Americans represented savagery and heathenism. Colonial Virginians justified slavery by convincing themselves that blacks (and Indians) were naturally lazy, treacherous, and stupid, among other shortcomings.

 128  CHAPTER 3  Colonial Ways of Life

 colonial slavery

 During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the profitable ­sugar-​­based economies of the French and British West Indies and Portuguese Brazil had the greatest demand for enslaved Africans, as sugar became valued almost as much as gold or silver. By 1675, the island colonies in the Caribbean had more than 100,000 slaves, while slaves in the American colonies numbered about 5,000. The profits generated by sugar colonies in the Caribbean were greater than all of the commerce in the American mainland colonies. As tobacco, rice, and indigo crops became more established in Maryland, Virginia, and the Carolinas, however, the number of African slaves in those colonies grew enormously. At the same time, the flow of white indentured servants from Britain and Europe to America was slowing. Between 1700 and 1709, only 1,500 indentured servants arrived in the American colonies; 9,000 enslaved Africans arrived during the same period. Until the eighteenth century, English immigrants made up 90 percent of the American colonists. After 1700, the largest number of new arrivals were enslaved Africans who totaled more than all European immigrants combined. The shifting popularity of black slaves over white servants reflected the growing industry of slave trading. In the late seventeenth century, the profitability of African slavery led dozens of new slave trading companies to emerge, both in Europe and America, thus expanding the availability of enslaved ­Africans and lowering the price. American colonists preferred slaves because they were officially viewed as property with no civil rights, and they (and their offspring) were servants for life, not for a fixed number of years. Africans were preferred over enslaved Indians because they could not escape easily in a land where they stood out because of their dark skin. In short, African slaves offered a better investment for colonial Americans.

 the market in slaves

 Once a slave ship arrived at an American port, Africans in chains, not knowing any English, would be auctioned to the highest bidder, who would cart them off to begin lifelong work for a complete stranger. They were usually forbidden to use their former languages, practice African religions, or to sustain their native cultures. With only rare exceptions, slaves were allowed to own nothing. Enslaved Africans were used in virtually all aspects of the expanding colonial economy. The vast majority worked on farms or plantations, often performing strenuous labor from dawn to dusk in oppressive heat and humidity. As Jedidiah Morse, a prominent Charleston minister, admitted in the late eighteenth century, “No white man, to speak generally, ever thinks of settling a farm, and improving it for himself, without negroes.”

­Race-​­Based Slavery  129


 During the eighteenth century, the demand for slaves soared in the southern colonies. By 1750, there were almost 250,000 slaves in British America. The vast majority resided in Virginia and Maryland, about 150,000 compared with 60,000 in South Carolina and Georgia. As the number of slaves grew, so, too, did the breadth of their talents and expertise. Over time, slaves became skilled artisans: blacksmiths, carpenters, bricklayers. Many enslaved women worked as household servants and midwives. Typically, the first wave of enslaved Africans lived five years after arriving in America. Eight of the ­thirty-​­two slaves that John Mercer brought to his Virginia plantation in the early eighteenth century died in their first year.

 slave abuse and resistance Colonial laws allowed whites to use brutal means to discipline and control their slaves. They were whipped, branded, castrated, or sold away, often to the Caribbean islands, where working conditions were even worse. A 1669 Virginia law declared that accidentally killing a slave who was being whipped or beaten was not a serious crime. During a ­three-​­year period, a South Carolina overseer whipped five slaves to death. William Byrd II, a wealthy Virginia planter, confessed that the “unhappy effect of owning many Negroes is the necessity of being severe.” Colonial newspapers were sprinkled with notices about runaway slaves. A Georgia slave owner asked readers to be on the lookout for “a negro fellow named Mingo, about 40 years old, and his wife Quante, a sensible wench about 20 with her child, a boy about 3 years old, all this country born.” In a few cases, slaves organized armed rebellions in which they stole weapons, burned and looted plantations, and occasionally killed their captors. In the late summer of 1739, some twenty slaves attacked a store in Stono, South Carolina, south of Charleston. Led by a slave named Jemmy, they killed the owner, seized weapons, and headed south toward freedom in Spanish Florida, gathering more recruits along the way. Within a few days, the slaves had roamed over fifteen miles and killed t­ wenty-​­five whites. The growing army of slaves marched in military formation, waving banners, beating drums, and freeing more slaves as they moved southward. Then the militia caught up with them. Most of the rebels were killed, and in the weeks that followed, sixty more were captured by enraged planters who “cut off their heads and set them up at every Mile Post.” The Stono Rebellion so frightened white planters that they convinced the colonial assembly to pass the ­so-​­called Negro Act of 1740, which called for more oversight of slave activities and harsher punishments for rebellious behavior. It also reduced the penalty for a white killing a slave to a minor offense and banned slaves from testifying in courts.

 130  CHAPTER 3  Colonial Ways of Life

 slavery in new york city In contrast to the experience of slaves in the southern colonies, most slaves in the northern colonies lived in towns or cities, and their urban environs gave them more opportunities to move about. New York City had more slaves than any other American city. By 1740, it was second only to Charleston in the percentage of slaves in its population. As the number of slaves increased in the congested city, racial fears and tensions ­mounted—​­and occasionally exploded. In 1712, several dozen slaves revolted; they started fires and then used swords, axes, and guns to kill whites as they attempted to fight the fires. Called out to restore order, the militia captured t­ wenty-​­seven slaves. Six committed suicide, and the rest were executed; some were burned alive. New York officials thereafter passed their own black code that strictly regulated slave behavior. The harsh regulations did not prevent another major racial incident. In the bitterly cold March of 1741, city dwellers worried about a series of suspicious

 Slavery in New Amsterdam (1642) The significance of African slaves to the colonial economy is the focus of this engraving of the Dutch colony New Amsterdam, later known as New York City.

Colonial Cities  131


 fires, including one at the governor’s house. Their worst fear was that the fires were set by slaves. “The Negroes are rising!” shouted terrified whites. The frantic city council launched an intense investigation to find the “villains.” Mary Burton, a ­sixteen-​­year-​­old white indentured servant, told authorities that slaves and poor whites were plotting to “burn the whole town” and kill the white men. The plotters were supposedly led by John Hughson, a white trafficker in stolen goods who owned the tavern where Mary Burton worked. His wife, two slaves, and a prostitute were charged as c­ o-​­conspirators. Despite their denials, all were convicted and hanged. Within weeks, more than half of the adult male slaves in the city were in jail. What came to be called the Conspiracy of 1741 finally ended after seventeen slaves and four whites were hanged; thirteen more blacks were burned at the stake, while many more were deported. Such organized rebellions were rare, however, in large part because the likelihood of success was so small and the punishments so severe. Much more common were subtler forms of resistance and accommodation adopted by enslaved ­Africans—​­stealing food, breaking tools, destroying crops, feigning illness, etc.

Colonial Cities
 Throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the American colonies were mostly populated by farmers or farmworkers. But a handful of cities blossomed into dynamic urban centers of political and social life. Economic opportunity drove most city dwellers. In New York City, for example, a visitor said the “art of getting money” dominated everything the residents did. Colonial cities hugged the coastline or, like Philadelphia, sprang up on rivers large enough to handle oceangoing vessels. Never comprising more than 10 percent of the colonial population, the large coastal cities had a disproportionate influence on commerce, politics, society, and culture. By the end of the colonial period, Philadelphia, with some 30,000 people, was the largest city in the colonies, and New York City, with about 25,000, ranked second. Boston numbered 16,000; Charleston, South Carolina, 12,000; and Newport, Rhode Island, 11,000.

 the social and political order

 The urban social elite was dominated by wealthy merchants and property owners served by a middle class of shop owners, innkeepers, and skilled craftsmen. Almost two thirds of urban male workers were a­ rtisans—​­people who made their living at

 132  CHAPTER 3  Colonial Ways of Life

 ­ andicrafts. They included carpenters h and coopers (­ barrel makers), shoemakers and tailors, silversmiths and blacksmiths, sailmakers, stonemasons, weavers, and potters. At the bottom of the social order were sailors, manual laborers, servants, and slaves. Colonial cities were busy, crowded, and dangerous. Epidemics such as cholera, malaria, and yellow fever were common. The use of open fireplaces for heating caused frequent fires that in turn led to the development of fire companies. Rising crime and violence required increased policing of neighborhoods by sheriffs and local militias. Colonists also were concerned The Rapalje Children John Durand painted the children of a wealthy about the poor and homeless. The numBrooklyn merchant wearing clothing ber of Boston’s poor receiving aid from typical of u ­ pper-​­crust urban society. colonial authorities rose from 500 in 1700 to 4,000 in 1736; in New York City, the number rose from 250 in 1698 to 5,000 in the 1770s. Those designated “helpless” among the destitute poor, especially the disabled, elderly, widows, and orphans, were often provided money, food, clothing, and fuel. In some towns, “poorhouses” were built to house the homeless poor and provide them with jobs.

 the urban web Overland travel in the colonies was initially by horse or by foot. Inns and taverns (also called public houses, or pubs) were especially important since travel at night was ­treacherous—​­and Americans loved to drink. (During the colonial period, it was said that when the Spanish settled an area, they would first build a church; the Dutch would first erect a fort; and the English would first construct a tavern.) In 1690, Boston alone had fi ­ fty-​ ­four taverns, half of them operated by women. Colonial taverns and inns were places to eat, relax, read a newspaper, play cards, gossip, and conduct business. And, of course, they were the most ­popular places to drink alcoholic beverages: beer, hard cider, and rum, which became the favored drink. But ministers and magistrates began to worry that the pubs were promoting drunkenness and social rebelliousness. Not only

Colonial Cities  133


 Taverns A tobacconist’s business card from 1770 captures men talking in a Philadelphia tavern while they drink ale and smoke pipes.

 were poor whites drinking heavily, but also Indians, which, one governor told the assembly, would have “fatal consequences to the Government.” Early in the eighteenth century, ministers succeeded in passing an ­anti-​ ­tavern law in Massachusetts Bay Colony. Called the Act against Intemperance, Immorality, and Profaneness, it was directed at taverns that had become “nurseries of intemperance.” It tightened the process of issuing licenses for the sale of liquor, eliminated ­fiddle-​­playing in pubs, called for the public posting of the names of “common drunkards,” and banned the sale of rum and brandy, the most potent beverages. After a few years, however, the law was rarely enforced, and the concerns about taverns and drinking continued. In 1726, a Bostonian declared that “the abuse of strong Drink is becoming Epidemical among us, and it is very justly Supposed . . . ​that the Multiplication of Taverns has contributed not a little to this Excess of Riot and Debauchery.” The failed 1712 law was the last legislative effort to restrict alcohol consumption before the Revolution. By the end of the seventeenth century, there were more taverns in America than any other business. Indeed, taverns became the most important social institution in the c­ olonies—​­and the most democratic. They were places where rich and poor often intermingled, and by the ­mid–​­eighteenth century, they would become the gathering places for protests against British rule.

 134  CHAPTER 3  Colonial Ways of Life

 ­ ong-​­distance communication was a more complicated matter. Postal serL vice in the seventeenth century was almost ­nonexistent—​­people gave letters to travelers or sea captains in hopes they would be delivered. Under a parliamentary law of 1710, the postmaster of London named a deputy in charge of the colonies, and a postal system eventually encompassed most of the Atlantic Seaboard, providing the colonies with an effective means of communication that would prove crucial in the growing controversy with Great Britain. More reliable mail delivery spurred the growing popularity of newspapers. Before 1745, t­ wenty-​­two newspapers had been started: seven in New England, ten in the middle colonies, and five in the South. An important landmark in the development of freedom of the press was John Peter Zenger’s 1735 trial for publishing criticisms of New York’s royal governor in his newspaper, the ­New-​ ­York Weekly Journal. English common law held that one might be punished for libel, or criticism that fostered “an ill opinion of the government.” Zenger’s lawyer claimed that the editor had published the ­truth. The jury agreed and found the editor not guilty.

The Enlightenment in America
 The most significant of the new European ideas circulating in ­eighteenth-​ ­century America grew out of a burst of innovative intellectual activity known as the Enlightenment, a profound breakthrough in understanding human society and the natural world. The Enlightenment celebrated rational inquiry, scientific research, and individual freedom. Enlightened people were those who sought the truth, wherever it might lead, rather than remain content with believing ideas and dogmas passed down through the ages or taken from the Bible. Immanuel Kant, the e­ ighteenth-​­century German philosopher, summed up the Enlightenment point of view by saying: “Dare to know! Have the courage to use your own understanding.” He and others used the power of reason to analyze the workings of nature, and they employed new tools like microscopes and telescopes to engage in close observation, scientific experimentation, and precise mathematical calculation.

 the age of reason The Enlightenment, often called the Age of Reason, was triggered when the ancient view that the earth was at the center of the universe was challenged by the controversial, heliocentric (­sun-​­centered) solar system described in 1533 by Nicolaus Copernicus, a Polish astronomer

The Enlightenment in America  135


 and Catholic priest. His theory that the earth orbits the sun was scorned by Catholic officials before it was confirmed by other scientists. In 1687, Englishman Isaac Newton (1642–1727) announced his transformational theory of the earth’s gravitational pull. Using both scientific experiments and mathematics, especially calculus, Newton challenged biblical notions of the world’s workings by depicting a changing, dynamic universe moving in accordance with natural laws that could be grasped by human ­reason and explained by mathematics. He implied that natural laws (rather than God) govern all things, from the orbits of the planets to the effects of gravity to the science of human relations: politics, economics, and society. Some enlightened people, called Deists, carried Newton’s scientific outlook to its logical conclusion, claiming that God created the world and designed its “natural laws,” and that these laws governed the operation of the universe. In other words, Deists insisted that God planned the universe and set it in motion, but no longer interacted directly with the earth and its people. So the rational God of the Deists was nothing like the intervening (providential) God of the Christian tradition, to whom believers prayed for daily guidance and direct support. Evil, according to the Deists, resulted not from humanity’s inherent sinfulness as outlined in the Bible but from human ignorance of the rational laws of nature. Therefore, the best way to improve both society and human nature, according to Deists such as Thomas Jefferson and Benjamin Franklin, was by cultivating Reason, which was the highest Virtue. (Enlightenment thinkers often capitalized both words.) By using education, reason, and scientific analysis, societies were bound to improve their knowledge as well as their quality of life. Faith in human progress was thus one of the most important beliefs of the Enlightenment. Equally important was the enlightened notion of political freedom. Both Jefferson and Franklin were intrigued by the English political philosopher John Locke (1632–1704), who maintained that “natural law” called for a government resting on the consent of the governed and respecting the “natural rights” of all. This idea would later influence colonial leaders’ efforts to justify a revolution.

 the american enlightenment

 Benjamin Franklin epitomized the Enlightenment. Born in Boston in 1706, Franklin left home at the age of seventeen, bound for Philadelphia. Six years later, he bought a print shop where he edited and published the Pennsylvania Gazette, one of the leading newspapers in the colonies. When he was t­wenty-​­six, he published Poor

 136  CHAPTER 3  Colonial Ways of Life

 Richard’s Almanack, a collection of seasonal weather forecasts, puzzles, household tips, and witty sayings. Before he retired from business at the age of ­forty-​­two, Franklin had founded a public library, started a fire company, helped create what became the University of Pennsylvania, and organized a debating club that grew into the American Philosophical Society. Franklin was devoted to scientific investigation. Skeptical and curious, pragmatic and irreverent, he was an inventive genius. His ­wide-​­ranging experiments encompassed the fields of medicine, meteorology, geology, astronomy, and Benjamin Franklin A champion of physics, among others. He developed the rational thinking and common sense Franklin stove, the lightning rod, bifobehavior, Franklin was an inventor, cal spectacles, and a glass harmonica. philosopher, entrepreneur, and statesman. Although raised as a Presbyterian, Franklin became a Deist who prized science and reason. He questioned the divinity of Jesus and the assumption that the Bible was truly the word of God. Like the European Deists, Franklin came to believe in a God that had created a universe directed by natural laws. For Franklin and others, to be “enlightened” meant developing the confidence and capacity to think for ­oneself, to think critically rather than simply accepting what tradition dictated as truth.

 education in the colonies

 White colonial Americans were among the most literate people in the world. Almost 90 percent of men (more than in England) could read. For the colonists at large, education in the traditional ideas and manners of s­ ociety—​­even literacy ­itself—​­remained ­primarily the responsibility of family and church. The modern concept of free public education would not be fully embraced until the nineteenth century. Yet colonists were concerned from the beginning that steps needed to be taken to educate their young. The Puritan emphasis on reading Scripture, which all Protestants shared to some degree, led to the emphasis on literacy. In 1647, the Massachusetts Bay ­Colony required every town to support a grammar school (a “Latin school” that could prepare a student for college).

The Great Awakening  137


The Dutch in New Netherland
 were as interested in education as the New England Puritans. In Pennsylvania, the Quakers established private schools. In the southern colonies, however, schools were rare. The wealthiest southern planters and merchants sent their children to England for schooling or hired tutors.

The Great
Awakening
 The growing popularity of Enlightenment rationalism posed a direct threat to traditional religious life in Europe and America. But Christianity has always shown remarkable resilience in the face of challenging new ideas. Colonial education A page from the This was certainly true in the early rhymed alphabet of The New England eighteenth century, when the Ameri- Primer, a popular American textbook can colonies experienced a widespread first published in the 1680s. revival of spiritual zeal designed to restore the primacy of emotion in the religious realm. Between 1700 and 1750, when the controversial ideas of the Enlightenment were circulating among the ­best-​­educated colonists, hundreds of new Christian congregations were founded. Most Americans (85 percent) lived in colonies with an “established” church, meaning that the colonial government officially ­endorsed—​­and collected taxes to ­support—​­a single official denomination. The Church of England, also known as Anglicanism, was the established church in Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, and the Carolinas. Puritan Congregationalism was the official faith in most of New England. In New York, Anglicanism vied with the Dutch Reformed Church for control. Pennsylvania had no single s­ tate-​­supported church, but Quakers dominated the legislative assembly. New Jersey and Rhode Island had no official denomination and hosted numerous Christian splinter groups. Most colonies organized religious life on the basis of local parishes, which defined their theological boundaries and defended them against people who

 138  CHAPTER 3  Colonial Ways of Life

 did not hold to the same faith. In colonies with official tax-supported religions, people of other faiths could not preach without the permission of the parish. In the 1730s and 1740s, the parish system was thrown into turmoil by the arrival of outspoken traveling evangelists, called itinerants, who claimed that most of the local parish ministers were incompetent. In their emotionally charged sermons, the itinerants, several of whom were white women and African Americans, insisted that Christians must be “reborn” in their convictions and behavior.

 revivalism During the early 1730s, worries about the erosion of religious fervor helped spark a series of emotional revivals known as the Great Awakening. The revivals quickly spread up and down the Atlantic coast. Every social class, ethnic group, and region that participated was swept up in the ecstasy of renewed spiritual passion. In the process, the revivals divided congregations, towns, and families, and fueled the growth of new denominations, especially the Baptists and Methodists. A skeptical Benjamin Franklin admitted that the Awakening was having a profound effect on social life: “Never did the people show so great a willingness to attend sermons. Religion is become the subject of most conversation.” jonathan

 Jonathan Edwards One of the foremost preachers of the Great Awakening, Edwards dramatically described the torments that awaited sinners in the afterlife.

 edwards In 1734–1735, a remarkable spiritual transformation occurred in the congregation of Jonathan Edwards, a p ­ rominent ­Congregationalist minister in the western Massachusetts town of Northampton. One of America’s most brilliant philosophers and theologians, Edwards had entered Yale College in 1716, at age thirteen, and graduated at the top of his class four years later. When Edwards arrived in Northampton in 1727, he was shocked by the town’s lack of religious conviction. He claimed that the young people of Northampton were preoccupied with sinful pleasures; they indulged in “lewd practices” that “corrupted others.”

The Great Awakening  139


 He warned that Christians had become dangerously obsessed with making and spending money, and that the new ideas associated with the Enlightenment were eroding the importance of religious life. To counteract the secularizing forces of the Enlightenment, Edwards rushed to restore the emotional side of religion. “Our people,” he said, “do not so much need to have their heads stored [with new scientific knowledge] as to have their hearts touched [with spiritual intensity].” Edwards was fiery and charismatic. His vivid descriptions of the sufferings of hell and the delights of heaven helped rekindle spiritual intensity among his congregants. By 1735, he could report that “the town seemed to be full of the presence of God; it never was so full of love, nor of joy.” To judge the power of the religious awakening, he thought, one need only observe that “it was no longer the Tavern” that drew local crowds, “but the Minister’s House.” In 1741, Edwards delivered his most famous sermon, “Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God.” It was designed in part to frighten people into seeking salvation. Edwards reminded the congregation that hell is real and that God “holds you over the pit of hell, much as one holds a spider, or some loathsome insect, over the fire, abhors you, and is dreadfully provoked. . . . ​He looks upon you as worthy of nothing else, but to be cast into the fire.” When he finished, he had to wait several minutes for the agitated congregants to quiet down before he led them in a closing hymn.

 george whitefield

 The most celebrated promoter of the Great Awakening was a young English minister, George Whitefield, whose reputation as a spellbinding evangelist preceded him to the colonies. Congregations were lifeless, he claimed, “because dead men preach to them.” Too many ministers were “slothful shepherds and dumb dogs.” Whitefield set out to restore the fires of religious intensity in America. In the autumn of 1739, the ­twenty-​­five-​ y­ ear-​­old evangelist began a ­fourteen-​ ­month tour, preaching to huge crowds from Maine to Georgia. His critics were as fervent as his admirers. A disgusted

George Whitefield The English
 minister’s dramatic eloquence roused Americans, inspiring many to experience a religious rebirth.

 140  CHAPTER 3  Colonial Ways of Life

 Bostonian described a revival meeting’s theatrics: “The meeting was carried on with . . . ​some screaming out in Distress and Anguish . . . ​some again jumping up and down . . . ​some lying along on the floor. . . . ​The whole with a very great Noise, to be heard at a Mile’s Distance, and continued almost the whole night.” The short, thin, ­cross-​­eyed Whitefield enthralled audiences with his golden voice, flamboyant style, and unparalleled eloquence. His sermons produced electric effects. Even Benjamin Franklin, a confirmed rationalist who went to see Whitefield preach in Philadelphia, was so excited by the fiery sermon that he emptied his pockets into the collection plate. Whitefield urged his listeners to experience a “new birth”—a sudden, emotional moment of conversion and salvation. By the end of his sermon, one listener reported, the entire congregation was “in utmost Confusion, some crying out, some laughing, and Bliss still roaring to them to come to Christ, as they answered, I will, I will, I’m coming, I’m coming.”

 radical evangelists

 Edwards and Whitefield inspired many imitators, the most radical of whom carried emotional evangelism to extremes, stirring up women as well as those at the bottom of s­ ociety—​­laborers, seamen, servants, slaves, and landless farm ­folk—​­and ordaining their own ministers. William Tennent, an ­Irish-​­born Presbyterian revivalist, charged that many local ministers were “cold and sapless,” afraid to “thrust the nail of terror into sleeping souls.” Tennent’s oldest son, Gilbert, also an evangelist, defended his aggressive tactics by explaining that he and other traveling preachers invaded parishes only when the local minister showed no interest in the “Getting of Grace and Growing in it.” The Tennents urged people to renounce their ministers and pursue salvation on their own. They also attacked the excesses of the wealthy and powerful. Worried members of the colonial elite charged that the radical revivalists were spreading “anarchy, levelling, and dissolution.” Singing Procession in 1740 This Equally unsettling to the elite was engraving depicts a characteristic New the Reverend James Davenport, the England singing procession at the most radical of the revivalists, who height of the Great Awakening. urged Christians to renounce “ratio-

The Great Awakening  141


 nalist” ministers influenced by the Enlightenment and become the agents of their own salvation through a purely emotional conversion experience. A Connecticut minister warned that Davenport and other extremists were “frightening people out of their senses” rather than offering reasonable sermons. In 1743, in New London, Connecticut, Davenport attracted a huge crowd by building a bonfire and encouraging people to burn their fancy clothes and rationalist books. A few weeks later, the unstable Davenport reversed himself and called his rantings “enthusiastical and delusive.”

Women and Revivals
 The Great Awakening’s most controversial element was the emergence of women who defied the biblical ban against women speaking in religious services. Scores of women served as lay exhorters, including Sarah Haggar Osborne, a Rhode Island schoolteacher who organized prayer meetings that eventually included men and women, black and white. When concerned ­ministers told her to stop, she refused to “shut my mouth and doors and creep into obscurity.” Similarly, in western Massachusetts, Bathsheba Kingsley stole her husband’s horse to spread the gospel among her rural neighbors because she had received “immediate revelations from heaven.” When her husband tried to intervene, she pummeled him with “hard words and blows,” praying loudly that he “go quick to hell.” Jonathan Edwards denounced Kingsley as a “brawling woman” who should “keep chiefly at home.” For all of the turbulence created by the revivals, however, churches, even the more democratic Baptist and Methodist congregations, remained male bastions of political authority.

 a changing religious landscape

The Great Awakening
 made religion intensely personal by creating both a deep sense of spiritual guilt and an intense yearning for redemption. Yet it also undermined many of the established churches by emphasizing that all individuals, regardless of wealth or social status, could receive God’s grace without the guidance of ministers. Denominations became bitterly divided as “Old Light” conservatives criticized disruptive and democratic revivalism and sparred with “New Light” evangelicals who delighted in provoking emotional outbursts among their listeners and celebrating individual freedom in matters of faith. Jonathan Edwards, for one, regretted the emergence of warring factions. We are “like two armies,” he said, “separated and drawn up in battle array, ready to fight one another.” New England religious life would never be the same, as Puritanism disintegrated amid the intense warfare over the revivals of the Great Awakening.

 142  CHAPTER 3  Colonial Ways of Life

 The Puritan ideal of religious uniformity was shattered. The crusty Connecticut Old Light minister, Isaac Stiles, denounced the “intrusion of choice into spiritual matters” and charged that the “multitudes were seriously, soberly, and solemnly out of their wits” in their embrace of ­ultra-​­emotional religion. John Henry Goetschius, a Dutch Reformed evangelist, shot back that Stiles and other Old Lights were simply determined to “impose on many people, against their will, their old, rotten, and stinking routine religion.” In Anglican Virginia, some fifty Baptist evangelists were jailed for disturbing the peace during the Great Awakening. New England subsequently attracted more and more Baptists, Presbyterians, Anglicans, and other denominations, while the revival frenzy scored its most lasting victories along the western frontier of the middle and southern colonies. In the more sedate churches of Boston, the principle of rational or enlightened religion gained the upper hand in a reaction against the excesses of revivalistic emotion. Boston ministers such as Charles Chauncey and Jonathan Mayhew found Puritan theology too cold and forbidding. To them, the Calvinist concept that people could be forever damned by predestination was irrational. They embraced many insights drawn from Enlightenment rationalism, arguing that God created laws of nature which people could discover and exploit.

 religious colleges

 In reaction to taunts that “­born-​­again” revivalist ministers lacked learning, the Awakening gave rise to denominational colleges that became the distinctive characteristic of American higher education. The three colleges already in existence had religious origins: Harvard College, founded in 1636 because the Puritans dreaded “to leave an illiterate ministry to the church when our present ministers shall lie in the dust”; the College of William and Mary, created in 1693 to strengthen the Anglican ministry; and Yale College, set up in 1701 to educate the Puritans of Connecticut, who believed that Harvard was drifting from the strictest orthodoxy. The College of New Jersey, later Princeton University, was founded by Presbyterians in 1746. In close succession came King’s College (1754) in New York, later renamed Columbia University, an Anglican institution; the College of Rhode Island (1764), later called Brown University, which was Baptist; Queens College (1766), later known as Rutgers, which was Dutch Reformed; and Dartmouth College (1769), which was Congregationalist and the outgrowth of a school for Indians.

 the heart versus the head Like a ferocious fire that burned intensely before dying out, the Great Awakening subsided by 1750. The emotional

The Great Awakening  143


 Awakening, like its counterpart, the rational Enlightenment, influenced the forces leading to the revolution against Great Britain and set in motion powerful currents that still flow in American life. Ministers could no longer control the direction of religious life, as more and more people took charge of their own spirituality and new denominations sprouted like mushrooms. The Awakening implanted in American culture the evangelical impulse and the emotional appeal of revivalism, weakened the status of the ­old-​­fashioned clergy and ­state-​­supported churches, and encouraged believers to exercise their own individual judgment. By encouraging the proliferation of denominations, it heightened the need for toleration of dissent. In some respects, however, the warring Awakening and the Enlightenment, one stressing the urgings of the spirit and the other celebrating the cold logic of reason, led by different roads to similar ends. Both movements spread across the mainland colonies and thereby helped bind them together. Both emphasized the power and right of individual d ­ ecision-​­making, and both aroused hopes that America would become the promised land in which people might attain the perfection of piety or reason, if not both. By urging believers to exercise their own spiritual judgment, revivals weakened the authority of the established churches and their ministers, just as colonial resentment of British economic regulations would later weaken the colonists’ loyalty to the king. As such, the Great Awakening and the Enlightenment helped nurture a growing commitment to individual freedom and resistance to authority that would play a key role in the rebellion against British “tyranny” in 1776.

CHAPTER REVIEW
Summary • 
 Colonial Demographics Cheap land lured poor immigrants to America. The initial shortage of women eventually gave way to a more equal gender ratio and a tendency to earlier marriage than in Europe, leading to higher birth rates and larger families. People also lived longer on average in the colonies than in Europe. The lower death rates led to rapid population growth in the colonies.

•


 Women in the Colonies English colonists brought their traditional beliefs and prejudices with them to America, including convictions about the inferiority of women. Colonial women remained largely confined to women’s work in the house, yard, and field. Over time, though, necessity created new opportunities for women outside their traditional roles.

•


 Colonial Differences A thriving colonial trading economy sent raw materials such as fish, timber, and furs to England in return for manufactured goods. The expanding economy created new wealth and a rise in the consumption of European goods, and it fostered the expansion of slavery. Agriculture diversified: tobacco was the staple crop in Virginia, rice in the Carolinas. Plantation agriculture based on slavery became entrenched in the South. New England’s prosperous shipping industry created a profitable triangular trade among Africa, America, and England. By 1790, German, ­Scots-​­Irish, Welsh, and Irish immigrants, as well as other European ethnic groups, had settled in the middle colonies, along with Quakers, Jews, Huguenots, and Mennonites.

•


 ­Race-​­Based Slavery ­Deep-​­rooted prejudice led to ­race-​­based slavery. Africans were considered “heathens” whose supposed inferiority entitled white Americans to use them for slaves. Africans brought diverse skills to help build America’s economy. The use of African slaves was concentrated in the South, where landowners used them to produce lucrative staple crops, such as tobacco, rice, and indigo. But slaves lived in cities, too, especially New York. As the slave population increased, race relations grew more tense, and slave codes were created to regulate the movement of enslaved people. Sporadic slave uprisings, such as the Stono Rebellion, occurred in both the North and South.

•


 The Enlightenment and the Great Awakening Printing presses, education, and city life created a flow of new ideas that circulated via ­long-​­distance travel, tavern life, the postal service, and newspapers. The attitudes of the Enlightenment were transported along international trade routes. Sir Isaac Newton’s scientific discoveries culminated in the belief that Reason could improve society. Benjamin Franklin, who believed that people could shape their own destinies, became the face of the Enlightenment in America. Deism expressed the religious views of the Age of Reason. By the 1730s, a revival of faith, the Great Awakening, swept through



 the colonies. New congregations formed as evangelists insisted that Christians be “reborn.” Individualism, not orthodoxy, was stressed in this first popular religious movement in America’s history.

Chronology
 1730 ­s –​­1740s



 First Africans arrive at Jamestown Harvard College is established Virginia enacts slave code declaring that enslaved children who were baptized as Christians remained slaves Salem witchcraft trials Great Awakening John Peter Zenger is tried for seditious libel Stono Rebellion George Whitefield preaches his first sermon in America, in Philadelphia Jonathan Edwards preaches “Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God”

Key Terms
 death rate p. 110

 slave codes p. 127

 birth rate p. 110

Stono Rebellion p. 129


 women’s work p. 112

Enlightenment p. 134


 staple crops p. 116

Deists p. 135


 triangular trade p. 120

Great Awakening p. 138


 ­race-​­based slavery p. 126

IJK
Go to InQuizitive to see what you’ve learned—and learn what you’ve missed—with personalized feedback along the way. 




From Colonies
 to States

 Boston Tea Party Disguised as Native Americans, a swarm of Patriots boarded three British ships and dumped more than 300 chests of East India Company tea into Boston Harbor.

F


 our great European naval p ­ owers—​­Spain, France, England, and the Netherlands (Holland)—created colonies in North America during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries as part of their larger fight for global supremacy. Throughout the eighteenth century, wars raged across Europe, mostly pitting the Catholic nations of France and Spain against Protestant Great Britain and the Netherlands. The conflicts increasingly spread to the Americas, and by the middle of the eighteenth century, North America had become a primary battleground, involving both colonists and Native Americans allied with different European powers. Spain’s sparsely populated settlements in the borderlands north of Mexico were small and weak compared to those in the British colonies. The Spanish had failed to create colonies with robust economies. Instead, Spain emphasized the conversion of native peoples to Catholicism, prohibited manufacturing within its colonies, strictly limited trade with the Native Americans, and s­ earched—​­in ­vain—​­for gold. The French and British colonies developed a thriving trade with Native Americans at the same time that the fierce rivalry between Great Britain and France gradually shifted the balance of power in Europe. By the end of the eighteenth century, Spain and the Netherlands would be in decline, leaving France and Great Britain to fight for dominance. The nearly constant warfare led Great Britain to tighten its control over the American colonies to raise the funds needed to combat France and Spain. Tensions over the British effort to preserve its empire at the expense of American freedoms would lead first to rebellion and eventually to revolution.

 focus questions 1. What were the similarities and differences in the way that the British and French empires administered their colonies before 1763? 2. What were some of the effects of the French and Indian War? How did it change relations among the European powers in North America?

 3. In what ways did the British try to strengthen their control over the colonies after the French and Indian War? How did the colonies respond? 4. What were the underlying factors in the events of the 1770s that led the colonies to declare their independence from Britain?



