 1064  CHAPTER 24  The Reactionary Twenties

 were immigrants, some of whom had a passion for socialism or a­ narchism—​­as well as a willingness to use violence to achieve their political goals. Fears of an invasion of foreign radicals led Congress to pass the Emergency Immigration Act of 1921, which limited total immigration to 150,000 a year and restricted newcomers from each European country to 3 percent of the total number of that nationality represented in the 1910 census. Three years later, after people complained that too many eastern and southern Europeans were still being admitted, Congress passed the Immigration Act of 1924. It reduced the number of admitted Europeans to 2 percent of the 1890 census, so as to include fewer “new” immigrants from southern and eastern Europe: Jews, Italians, Poles, and Russians. The purpose of the new quotas was to shrink the total number of immigrants, to favor immigrants from northern and western Europe, and to reduce those from southern and eastern Europe. A Kansas congressman expressed the prejudices against German and Italian Catholics felt by many rural American Protestants: “On the one side is beer, bolshevism, unassimilating settlements and perhaps many ­flags—​­on the other side is constitutional government; one flag, stars and stripes.” The immigration laws targeted particular groups. For example, they banned immigrants from Japan or China. The Immigration Act of 1924, however, allowed newcomers from countries in the Western Hemisphere. An unintended result was that people of Latin American descent (chiefly Mexicans, Puerto Ricans, and Cubans) became the ­fastest-​­growing ethnic minority during the twenties. The number of Mexicans living in Texas increased tenfold between 1900 and 1930 in response to the needs of Texas farmers for “stoop” laborers. “Cotton picking suits the Mexican,” was the common assertion among Texas growers. Because Mexican migrant workers were mostly homeless nomads willing to move with the seasons, farm owners came to prefer them over black and white tenants and farm laborers.

 sacco and vanzetti

 The nativism embedded in the new immigration laws reinforced the connection between European immigrants and political radicalism. That connection erupted in the most widely publicized criminal case of the twenties. On May 5, 1920, two Italian immigrants who described themselves as revolutionary anarchists eager to topple the American government, shoemaker Nicola Sacco and fish peddler Bartolomeo Vanzetti, were arrested outside Boston, Massachusetts, for stealing $16,000 from a shoe factory and killing the paymaster and a guard. Both men were armed with loaded pistols when

Reactionary Conservatism and Immigration Restriction  1065


 Sacco and Vanzetti The trial and conviction of these ­working-​­class Italian immigrants became a public spectacle amid the growing mood of nativism.

 arrested, both lied to police, and both were identified by eyewitnesses. The stolen money, however, was never found, and several people claimed that they were with Sacco and Vanzetti far from the scene of the crime when it occurred. The Sacco and Vanzetti case occurred at the height of Italian immigration to the United States and against the backdrop of numerous terror attacks by anarchists, some of which Sacco and Vanzetti had participated in. The charged atmosphere, called “the Red hysteria” by one journalist, ensured that the men’s trial would be a public spectacle. In July 1921, Sacco and Vanzetti were convicted and sentenced to death. Their legal appeals lasted six years before they were electrocuted on August 23, 1927, still claiming their innocence. To millions of workers and liberals around the world, Sacco and Vanzetti became martyrs, victims of capitalist injustice. People still debate their guilt or innocence.

 the new klan

 The most violent of the reactionary movements during the twenties was a revived Ku Klux Klan, the infamous ­post–​­Civil War group

 1066  CHAPTER 24  The Reactionary Twenties

 of ­anti-​­black racists that had r­ e-​­created itself in 1915. The old Klan had died out in the 1870s once white Democrats regained control of the former Confederate states after Reconstruction. The new ­Klan—​­the Invisible Empire of the Knights of the Ku Klux ­Klan—​­was, by 1920, a nationwide organization devoted to “the maintenance of White Supremacy” and “100 percent Americanism”; only “natives”—white Protestants born in the United ­States—​­could be members. At its peak, the new Klan numbered over 4 million members, making it the largest ­far-​­right movement in history. Shrouded in secret signs and codes, practicing weird rituals, and costumed in white sheets and spooky hats, the Klan called for militant patriotism, restrictions on immigration and voting, and strict personal morality. It opposed bootleg liquor and labor unions, and it preached hatred against not only African Americans but Roman Catholics, Jews, immigrants, Communists, atheists, prostitutes, and adulterers. The United States was no melting pot, shouted Imperial Wizard William J. Simmons: “It is a garbage can! . . . ​ When the hordes of aliens walk to the ballot box and their votes outnumber yours, then that alien horde has got you by the throat.” Bigotry became big business. The new Klan was mobilized by shrewd marketers eager to make money on racism. Each member of a local “klavern” paid a $10 initiation fee and $5 in annual dues, and was required to buy an official Klan robe, a pointed hood, and other accessories. Whole families attended Klan gatherings, “klasping” hands while listening to violent speeches, watching fireworks, and burning crosses. A Colorado judge said that his neighbors had “paid ten dollars to hate somebody [by joining the Klan], and they were determined to get their money’s worth.” In Texas, the Klan focused on imposing its severe view of righteous Protestant morality on others. Members used the instruments of t­errorism—​ ­harassment, intimidation (often in the form of burning crosses), beatings, and “tar and feathers”—to discipline alcoholics, gamblers, adulterers, and other sinners. In the spring of 1922 alone, the Dallas Klan flogged s­ ixty-​­eight men. The reborn Klan, headquartered in Atlanta, grew rapidly across the nation, and especially in the rural Midwest. During the twenties, 40 percent of its “­Anglo-​­Saxon” members were in three midwestern states: Illinois, Indiana, and Ohio. Recruiters, called Kleagles, were told to “play upon whatever prejudices were most acute in a particular area.” In Texas, the Klan fed on prejudice against Mexicans; in California, hatred focused on Japanese Americans; in New York, the enemy was primarily Jews and Catholics. Most Klan members were small farmers, sharecroppers, or wage workers, but the organization also attracted clergymen, engineers, doctors, lawyers, accountants, business leaders, and teachers. As a prominent southern journalist

Reactionary Conservatism and Immigration Restriction  1067


 observed, the new Klan was “­anti-​­Negro, ­anti-​­alien, a­ nti-​­red, ­anti-​­Catholic, a­ nti-​­Jew, ­anti-​­Darwin, ­anti-​­Modern, ­anti-​­Liberal; Fundamentalist, vastly Moral, militantly Protestant.” African Americans grew increasingly concerned. The Chicago Defender, the black newspaper with the widest circulation in the nation, urged its readers to fight back against Klansmen trying to “win what their fathers [in the Civil War] lost by fire and sword.” By 1923, the Klan’s membership had surpassed 4 million, including judges, mayors, sheriffs, state legislators, six governors, and three U.S. senators. The Grand Dragon, an Indiana con man named David C. Stephenson, grew so influential in electing local and state officials (the “kluxing” of America, as he called it) that he boasted, “I am the law in Indiana!” K ­ lan-​­endorsed candidates won the Indiana governorship and controlled the state legislature. At the 1924 Republican State Convention, Stephenson patrolled the aisles with a pistol. He later confessed that he “purchased the county and state officials.” Stephenson, who had grown wealthy by skimming from the dues he collected from Klan members as well as selling robes and hoods, planned to run for president of the United States. The Klan’s influence, both in Indiana and nationwide, suddenly crumbled, however, after Stephenson was arrested and sentenced to life in prison in 1925 for kidnapping and raping a ­twenty-​­eight-​­year-​­old woman who then

 Ku Klux Klan rally In 1925, the KKK marched down Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, D.C.

 1068  CHAPTER 24  The Reactionary Twenties

 c­ ommitted suicide. Membership tumbled, and Klan organizations splintered or shut down altogether. Several states passed ­anti-​­Klan laws, and others banned the wearing of masks and burning of crosses. By 1930, nationwide membership had dwindled to 100,000, mostly southerners. Yet the impulse underlying the Klan lived on, fed by ­deep-​­seated fears and hatreds that have yet to disappear.

Fundamentalism
 While fighting “growing immorality” and the “alien menace,” the Klan also defended “­old-​­time religion” against dangerous ideas circulating in “progressive” or “liberal” Protestant churches. The most threatening ideas were that the Bible was not literally the word of God and that Charles Darwin’s theories of biological evolution were true. Conservative Protestants embraced a militant fundamentalism, distinctive for its hostility toward new “liberal” beliefs and its insistence on the literal truth of the Bible. The result was a religious civil war, often called the m ­ odernist–​ ­fundamentalist conflict. It divided congregations and whole denominations. A burst of Protestant fundamentalism swept the country, largely as a reaction to the spread of modernism in mainline Protestantism, which sought to accommodate Christian teaching with modern science. In a famous 1922 sermon titled “Shall the Fundamentalists Win?” Harry Emerson Fosdick, the progressive pastor at New York City’s First Presbyterian Church, dismissed biblical fundamentalism as “immeasurable folly.” The Bible, he explained, was not literally the “word of God,” but instead was a representation of God’s wonders. Christianity had nothing to fear from Darwinian evolution or modern science, he argued, for liberal Christianity “saves us from the necessity of apologizing for immature states in the development of the biblical revelation.” Fosdick’s ­liberalism—​­he was an outspoken critic of racism and social ­injustice—​­outraged fundamentalists who launched an effort to “try” him for heresy. Fosdick decided to resign instead. Among national leaders, however, only the “Great Commoner,” William Jennings Bryan, the former Democratic congressman, secretary of state, and ­three-​­time presidential candidate, had the support, prestige, and eloquence to transform fundamentalism into a popular crusade. Bryan was a strange bird, a liberal progressive and pacifist populist in politics and a ­right-​­wing religious crusader. He remained a firm believer in the literal truth of the Bible. Bryan backed new state laws banning the teaching of evolution in public schools. He condemned Darwin’s theory of evolution, which suggested that human beings over millions of years had evolved from monkeys and apes,

Reactionary Conservatism and Immigration Restriction  1069


 with the same passion he had once directed against Republican presidential candidates.

 the scopes trial

 During the 1920s, ­anti-​­evolution bills were introduced in numerous state legislatures, but the only victories came in the S­ outh—​ ­and there were few of those. Miriam “Ma” Ferguson, the first woman governor of Texas (her husband “Pa” Ferguson had earlier been impeached as governor), outlawed school textbooks that included sections on Darwinism. “I am a Christian mother who believes that Jesus Christ died to save humanity,” she declared, “and I am not going to let that kind of rot go into Texas schoolbooks.” The dramatic highpoint of the fundamentalist war on Darwinism came not in Texas but in Tennessee, where in 1925 the legislature outlawed the teaching of evolution in public schools and colleges. In the mining town of Dayton, in eastern Tennessee, civic leaders eager to create publicity for their depressed economy persuaded John T. Scopes, a t­ wenty-​­four-​­year-​­old substitute ­high-​­school science teacher, to become a test case against the new law. He was arrested for “teaching” Darwin’s theory of evolution. The Scopes Trial did indeed bring worldwide publicity to Dayton, but not the kind town leaders had hoped for. Before the start of the ­twelve-​­day trial on July 10, 1925, the sweltering streets of Dayton overflowed with evangelists, atheists, ­hot-​­dog and ­soda-​­pop peddlers, and some 200 newspaper and radio reporters. Main Street merchants festooned their shop windows with pictures of apes and monkeys lampooning Darwinian evolution. One store urged visitors, “Don’t monkey around when you come to ­Dayton—​­come to us.” A man tattooed with Bible verses preached on a street corner while a live monkey was paraded about town. The two warriors pitting science against fundamentalism were both national celebrities: Bryan, who had offered his services to the prosecution, and Chicagoan Clarence Darrow, the nation’s most famous defense attorney, a tireless defender of the rights of the working class, who had volunteered to defend Scopes and evolution. Bryan insisted that the trial was about a state’s right to determine what was taught in the public schools. It was a “contest between evolution and Christianity, a duel to the death.” Darrow, who viewed the law as a blood sport, countered: “Scopes is not on trial. Civilization is on trial.” His goal was to prevent “bigots and ignoramuses from controlling the education of the United States” by proving that America was “founded on liberty and not on narrow, mean, intolerable and brainless prejudice of soulless ­religio-​­maniacs.” On July 20, the seventh day of the trial, the defense called Bryan as an “expert” witness on biblical interpretation. Darrow began by asking him about

 1070  CHAPTER 24  The Reactionary Twenties

 Monkey trial In this snapshot of the courtroom, Scopes (far left) clasps his face in his hands and listens to one of his attorneys (second from right). Darrow (far right), too, listens on, visibly affected by the sweltering weather.

 biblical stories. Did he believe that Jonah was swallowed by a whale and that Joshua made the sun stand still? Yes, Bryan replied. All things were possible with God. Darrow pressed on relentlessly, even cruelly. What about the great flood and Noah’s ark? Was Eve really created from Adam’s rib? Bryan hesitated and fumbled to reply. The crowd grew uneasy as the hero of fundamentalism crumpled in the heat. Bryan appealed to the judge for relief, claiming that the Bible was not on trial, only to have Darrow yell: “I am examining you on your fool ideas that no intelligent Christian on earth believes.” A humiliated Bryan claimed that Darrow was insulting Christians. Darrow, his thumbs clasping his colorful suspenders, shot back: “You insult every man of science and learning in the world because he does not believe in your fool religion.” At one point, Darrow and Bryan, their patience exhausted, lunged at each other, prompting the judge to adjourn court. As the trial ended, the judge said that the only question for the jury was whether John T. Scopes had taught evolution, and no one had denied that he had done so. The jurors did not even sit down before deciding, in nine minutes, that Scopes was guilty. But the Tennessee Supreme Court, while upholding

Reactionary Conservatism and Immigration Restriction  1071


 the a­ nti-​­evolution law, waived Scopes’s $100 fine on a technicality. Both sides claimed victory. Five days after the trial ended, Bryan, still in Dayton, died in his sleep at age ­sixty-​­five. Scopes left Dayton to study geology at the University of Chicago; he became a petroleum engineer. For all of its comic aspects, the Scopes Trial symbolized the waning of an old order in America and the rise of a modern ­outlook—​­more pluralistic, diverse, and skeptical, more tolerant of controversial ideas, and less obsessed with intellectual control. Still, the debate between fundamentalism and modernism continues today.

Prohibition
 William Jennings Bryan died knowing that one of his crusades had succeeded: the distribution of alcoholic beverages had been outlawed nationwide. The movement to prohibit the sale of beer, wine, and liquor forged an unusual alliance between rural and s­mall-​­town Protestants and urban political ­progressives—​­between believers in “­old-​­time religion,” who opposed drinking as sinful, and progressive social reformers, mostly women, who were convinced that Prohibition would reduce prostitution and ­alcohol-​­related violence. What connected the two groups were the ethnic and social prejudices that many members shared. The head of the ­Anti-​­Saloon League, for example, declared that German Americans “eat like gluttons and drink like swine.” For many ­anti-​­alcohol crusaders, in fact, the primary goal of Prohibition seemed to be policing the behavior of the f­oreign-​­born, the working class, and the poor, just as fundamentalists sought to enforce their religious beliefs on others. During the Great War, the need to use grain for food rather than for making booze, combined with a grassroots backlash against beer brewers because of their German background, also transformed the cause of Prohibition into a virtual test of American patriotism. On December 18, 1917, Congress sent to the states the Eighteenth Amendment. Ratified on January 16, 1919, it banned “the manufacture, sale, and transportation of intoxicating liquors,” effective one year later. The popular Christian evangelist Billy Sunday, who described himself as a “temperance Republican down to my toes,” told the 10,000 people gathered at his tabernacle to celebrate the outlawing of booze, that the age of righteousness was at hand: “Men will walk upright now; women will smile and the children will laugh.” As the most ambitious social reform ever attempted in the United States, however, Prohibition proved to be a colossal and costly failure. It did not suddenly persuade people to quit drinking. Instead, it compelled millions to

 1072  CHAPTER 24  The Reactionary Twenties

 ­ reak—​­or ­stretch—​­the law. In 1923, a federal agent said it would take a visitor b in any city less than thirty minutes to find a drink. In New Orleans, he added, it would only take ­thirty-​­five seconds. The National Prohibition Act of 1919 (commonly called the Volstead Act) outlined the rules and regulations needed to enforce the Eighteenth Amendment. It had so many loopholes that it virtually guaranteed failure, however. Technically, it never said that drinking alcohol was illegal, only the manufacture, distribution, and sale of alcoholic beverages. In addition, individuals and organizations were allowed to keep and drink any liquor owned on January 16, 1919. Not surprisingly, people stocked up before the law took effect. Farmers were allowed to “preserve” their fruits through the process of fermenting them, which resulted in barns stockpiled with “hard cider” and homemade wine. ­So-​­called medicinal liquor was also still allowed, which meant that physicians (and even veterinarians) wrote numerous prescriptions for “medicinal” brands such as Old ­Grand-​­Dad and Jim Beam whiskies. Thousands of people set up home breweries to make their own beer, producing 700 million gallons in 1929 alone. Wine was made just as easily, and “bathtub gin” was the easiest of all, requiring little more than a ­one-​­gallon still and some fruit, grain, or potatoes. Liquor crossed the nation’s 18,700-­mile-​ ­long borders more easily than people did. ­Two-​­thirds of the illegal liquor came from Canada, most of the rest from Mexico or overseas. The new law was too sweeping to enforce and too inconveniencing for most Americans to respect. It also had unexpected consequences. The loss of liquor taxes cost the federal government 10 percent of its annual revenue, and the closing of breweries, distilleries, and saloons eliminated thousands of jobs. An even greater weakness of Prohibition was that Congress never supplied adequate funding to enforce it. Given the public thirst for alcohol and the profits to be made in making and selling it illegally (“bootlegging”) it would have taken armies of agents to police the nation, and jail cells would have overflowed with violators. New York’s mayor said it would take 250,000 policemen to enforce Prohibition in his city alone. In w ­ orking-​­class and e­ thnic-​­rich Detroit, the bootleg industry was second in size only to the auto industry. Moreover, a huge number of prominent Americans regularly broke the law. President Warren G. Harding drank and served bootleg liquor in the White House, explaining that he was “unable to see this as a great moral issue,” and the largest bootlegger in Washington, D.C., reported that “a majority of both houses” of Congress were regular customers.

Reactionary Conservatism and Immigration Restriction  1073


 The efforts to defy Prohibition generated widespread police corruption and boosted organized crime. Many of the activities and images associated with the Roaring Twenties were fueled by bootleg liquor supplied by crime syndicates and sold in speakeasies, which local policemen often ignored in exchange for bribes. W ­ ell-​­organized crime syndicates behaved like giant corporations; they controlled the entire stream of liquor’s production, pricing, All fair in drink and war Torpedoes distribution, and sales. As a result, the filled with malt whiskey were discovered Prohibition Era was a f­ourteen-​­ year in the New York harbor in 1926, an orgy of unparalleled criminal activity. elaborate attempt by bootleggers to By 1930, more than o ­ ne-​­third of Amer- smuggle alcohol during Prohibition. Each “torpedo” had an air compartment icans in federal prison were Prohibition so it could be floated to shore. violators. Although total national alcohol consumption did decrease during the twenties, as did the number of deaths from alcohol abuse, in many cities drinking actually increased during Prohibition. New York City’s police commissioner estimated that there were 32,000 speakeasies in the city in 1929. There had been only 15,000 saloons when Prohibition started. As the popular humorist Will Rogers quipped, “Prohibition is better than no liquor at all.” Prohibition supplied organized crime with a source of enormous new income. The most famous ­Prohibition-​­era gangster was Alphonse “Scarface” Capone. In 1927, his C ­ hicago-​­based bootlegging, prostitution, and gambling empire brought him an annual income of $60 million and involved an army of 700 gangsters involved in 300 murders (none solved). Capone was a ­larger-​ ­than-​­life hero to many. He gave huge tips to waiters and hatcheck girls and provided a soup kitchen for Chicago’s poorest residents. When criticized, he claimed to be providing the public with the goods and services it demanded: “Some call it bootlegging. Some call it racketeering. I call it business. They say I violate the prohibition law. Who doesn’t?” Capone neglected to add that he had also beaten to death several police officers; ordered the execution of dozens of rivals; and bribed mayors, judges, and policemen. ­ Law-​­ enforcement officials led by FBI agent Eliot Ness began to smash Capone’s bootlegging operations in 1929. In the

 1074  CHAPTER 24  The Reactionary Twenties

 end, he was tried and convicted on charges of tax evasion and sentenced to eleven years in prison.

A
Republican Resurgence  In national politics, the s­ mall-​­town backlash against the immorality of modern city l­ife—​­whether represented by fears of immigrant radicals plotting revolution, liberal churches not taking the Bible literally, or ­jazzed-​­up flappers swilling ­cocktails—​­was mirrored by a Republican resurgence determined to reverse the progressivism of Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson. Progressivism lost its energies for several reasons. For one thing, its leaders were no more. Roosevelt died in 1919 at the age of sixty, just as he was beginning to campaign for the 1920 Republican presidential nomination. Wilson, too, had envisioned an unprecedented third term, but a stroke forced him to finish out his second term broken physically and mentally. Many Americans preferred other candidates anyway. Organized labor resented the Wilson administration’s crackdown on striking workers in 1919–1920. Farmers in the Great Plains and the West thought that wartime price controls on commodities had discriminated against them. Liberal intellectuals became disillusioned with grassroots democracy because of popular support for Prohibition, the Ku Klux Klan, and religious fundamentalism. By 1920, ­middle-​­class voters had become preoccupied with restoring a “new era” of prosperity based on mass production and mass consumption. Finally, the public turned away from progressivism in part because it had accomplished its major goals: the Eighteenth Amendment (1919), which outlawed alcoholic beverages, and the Nineteenth Amendment (1920), which allowed women nationwide to vote. Progressivism did not disappear in the 1920s, however. Progressive Republicans and Democrats dominated key leadership positions in Congress during much of the decade even while conservative Republicans occupied the White House. The progressive impulse for honest, efficient government and regulation of business remained strong, especially at the state and local levels, where efforts to improve public education, public health, and s­ocial-​­welfare programs gained momentum during the decade. At the national level, however, conservative Republicans returned to power.

 harding and “normalcy”

 After the Great War and the furious debate over the League of Nations, most Americans were weary of Woodrow Wilson’s crusading idealism. Wilson himself recognized the shifting public

A
Republican Resurgence 1075 

 mood. “It is only once in a generation,” he remarked, “that a people can be lifted above material things. That is why conservative government is in the saddle ­two-​­thirds of the time.” In 1920, Republican leaders turned to a likeable mediocrity as their presidential candidate: Warren G. Harding, a dapper, s­ilver-​­haired U.S. senator from Ohio. Harding was selected not for his abilities or experience (which were minimal) but because he was from a key state and looked presidential. Harding set the conservative tone of his campaign when he told a Boston audience that it was time to end Wilson’s progressivism and internationalism: America did not need “heroics, but healing; not nostrums, but normalcy; not revolution, but restoration; not agitation, but adjustment; not surgery, but serenity; not the dramatic, but the dispassionate.” Harding pledged to “safeguard America first . . . ​to exalt America first, to live for and revere America first.” The Democrats were initially encouraged by the Republicans’ decision to nominate Harding, but they also had to find a candidate of their own. At their convention, the divided delegates finally chose another Ohioan, James Cox, a former newspaper publisher and ­three-​­term governor of the state. For vice president, the convention chose New Yorker Franklin Delano Roosevelt, only ­thirty-​­eight years old, who as assistant secretary of the navy occupied the same position his Republican cousin Theodore Roosevelt had once held. Handsome, vigorous, and a stirring speaker, he would deliver more than 1,000 speeches during the campaign. But Cox’s campaign was disorganized and underfunded, and the Democrats struggled against the conservative postwar mood. In the words of progressive journalist William Allen White, Americans were “tired of issues, sick at heart of ideals, and weary of being noble.” The Republicans took the offensive, blaming Wilson and the Democrats for the nation’s troubles. Harding won big, getting 16 million votes to 9 million for Cox, who carried no state outside the Solid South. “It wasn’t a landslide,” a Democratic organizer contended. “It was an earthquake.” The lopsided victory increased the ­Republican majority in both houses of Congress. Franklin Roosevelt predicted that his party could not hope to return to power until the Republicans led the nation “into a serious period of depression and unemployment.” He was right.

 “just a plain fellow”

 Harding’s vanilla promise of a “return to normalcy” reflected his unexceptional background and limited abilities. One of his own speechwriters admitted that his boss was both “indolent” and “ignorant of most of the big questions that would confront him.” A farmer’s

 1076  CHAPTER 24  The Reactionary Twenties

 The Ohio gang President Warren G. Harding (third from right) surrounded himself with a network of friends, often appointing them to public office despite inferior qualifications.

 son and newspaper editor, Harding described himself as “just a plain fellow” who was “­old-​­fashioned and even reactionary in matters of faith and morals” and had pledged “total abstinence” from alcohol. In fact, however, Harding was a h ­ ell-​­raiser. He drank outlawed liquor in the White House, smoked and chewed tobacco, hosted ­twice-​­weekly poker games, and had numerous extramarital affairs and even fathered children with women other than his domineering wife, Florence Harding, whom he called “the Duchess.” His dalliances brought him much grief. One of the women blackmailed him, demanding money for her ­silence—​­which she received. The public was virtually unaware of Harding’s escapades. Voters saw him as a handsome, charming politician who looked the part of a leader. Yet Harding privately worried about his own limitations. “I am not fit for this office and should never have been here,” he once admitted. “I cannot hope to be one of the great presidents, but perhaps I may be remembered as one of the best loved.” ­Tart-​­tongued Alice Roosevelt Longworth, daughter of Theodore Roosevelt, said Harding “was not a bad man. He was just a slob.”

A
Republican Resurgence 1077 

 Harding in office had much in common with Ulysses S. Grant. His cabinet, like Grant’s, mixed some of the “best minds” in the party, whom he had promised to seek out, with a few of the worst. Charles Evans Hughes, like Grant’s Hamilton Fish, became a distinguished secretary of state. Herbert Hoover in the Commerce Department, Andrew W. Mellon in the Treasury Department, and Henry C. Wallace in the Agriculture Department functioned efficiently and made policy on their own. Other cabinet members and administrative appointees, however, were not so conscientious. The secretary of the interior landed in prison, and the attorney general narrowly escaped serving time. Many lesser offices went to members of the “Ohio gang,” a group of Harding’s drinking buddies who met in a house on K Street near the White House to help the president relieve the pressures of his high office. Harding and his lieutenants set about dismantling or neutralizing many progressive regulatory laws and agencies. The president’s four Supreme Court appointments were all conservatives, including Chief Justice William Howard Taft, who announced that he had been “appointed to reverse a few decisions.” During the 1920s, the ­Taft-​­led court struck down a federal ­child-​­labor law and a ­minimum-​­wage law for women, issued numerous injunctions against striking unions, and passed rulings limiting the powers of federal agencies that regulated big businesses.

 andrew mellon and the economy

 The Harding administration inherited a slumping economy burdened by high wartime taxes and a national debt that had ballooned from $1 billion in 1914 to $27 billion in 1920 because of the expenses associated with the war. Unemployment was at nearly 12 percent. To generate economic growth, Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon, at the time the t­ hird-​­richest man in the world behind John D. Rockefeller and Henry Ford, developed what came to be called the Mellon plan, which called for reducing federal spending and lowering tax rates. Mellon persuaded Congress to pass the landmark Budget and Accounting Act of 1921, which created a Bureau of the Budget to streamline the process of preparing an annual federal budget to be approved by Congress. The bill also created a General Accounting Office to audit spending by federal agencies. This act fulfilled a ­long-​­held progressive desire to bring greater efficiency and nonpartisanship to the budget preparation process. The brilliant but cold Mellon (his son described him as a “­thin-​­voiced, ­thin-​­bodied, shy and uncommunicative man”) also proposed a series of tax reductions. By 1918, the tax rate on the highest income bracket had risen to 73 percent. Mellon believed that such high rates were pushing wealthy Amer-

 1078  CHAPTER 24  The Reactionary Twenties

 icans to avoid paying taxes by investing their money in foreign countries or in ­tax-​­free government bonds. His policies systematically reduced tax rates while increasing tax revenues. The top tax rate was cut from 73 percent in 1921 to 24 percent in 1929. Rates for individuals with the lowest annual incomes were also cut substantially, helping the working poor. By 1926, those with incomes of $300,000 or more were the source of 65 percent of federal income tax revenue. In 1921, less than 20 percent had come from this group. During this same period, the overall tax burden on those with incomes of less than $10,000 dropped from $155 million to $32.5 million. By 1929, barely 2 percent of American workers had to pay any income tax at all. At the same time, Mellon helped Harding reduce the federal budget from its wartime highs. Government expenditures fell, as did the national debt, and the economy soared. Unemployment plummeted to 2.4 percent in 1923. Mellon’s supporters labeled him the greatest secretary of the Treasury since Alexander Hamilton in the late eighteenth century. In addition to tax cuts, Mellon, who had earlier built huge empires in the steel, oil, shipbuilding, coal, banking, and aluminum industries, promoted the l­ong-​­standing Republican policy of high tariffs on imported goods. The ­Fordney-​­McCumber Tariff of 1922 increased rates on imported chemical and metal products to help prevent the revival of German corporations that had dominated those industries before the Great War. To please commercial farmers, the new act included tariffs on agricultural imports as well.

 reduced regulation

 The Republican economic program also sought to dismantle or neutralize many progressive regulatory laws and agencies. Harding appointed commissioners to these federal agencies who would promote “regulatory capitalism” and policies “friendly” to business interests. The prominent Republican senator Henry Cabot Lodge, who helped guide Harding’s choice of men to lead the regulatory agencies, boasted that “we have torn up Wilsonism by the roots.”

 racial progressivism

 In one area, however, Warren G. Harding proved to be more progressive than Woodrow Wilson. He reversed the Wilson administration’s segregationist policy of excluding African Americans from federal government jobs. He also spoke out against the vigilante racism that had flared up across the country during and after the war. In his first speech to a joint session of Congress in 1921, Harding insisted that the nation must deal with the festering “race question.” The horrific racial incidents were a stain on America’s democratic ideals. The new president, unlike his Democratic predecessor, attacked the Ku Klux Klan for fomenting “hatred and prejudice and

A
Republican Resurgence 1079 

 violence,” and he urged Congress “to wipe the stain of barbaric lynching from the banners of a free and orderly, representative democracy.” The Senate, however, failed to pass the bill Harding promoted.

 setbacks for unions

 Urban workers shared in the affluence of the 1920s. “A workman is far better paid in America than anywhere else in the world,” a French visitor wrote in 1927, “and his standard of living is enormously higher.” Nonfarm workers gained about 30 percent in real wages between 1921 and 1928, while farm income rose only 10 percent. Yet organized labor suffered in the 1920s. Although President Harding endorsed collective bargaining and tried to reduce the t­welve-​­hour workday and the s­ ix-​­day workweek to give the working class “time for leisure and family life,” he ran into stiff opposition in Congress. The widespread strikes of 1919 had created fears that unions promoted radical socialism. Between January 1920 and August 1921, the unemployment rate jumped from 2 percent to 14 percent, and industrial production fell by 23 percent as

 The Gastonia strike These textile workers pit their strength against that of a National Guardsman during a strike at the Loray Mill in Gastonia, North Carolina, in 1929.

 1080  CHAPTER 24  The Reactionary Twenties

 the economy made the transition from war to peace. The brief postwar depression so weakened the unions that in 1921 business groups in Chicago designated the open shop to be the “American plan” of employment. Unlike the closed shop, which forced businesses to hire only union members, the open shop gave an employer the right to hire anyone. A labor organizer identified another reason for the weakness of unions in the New Era: “The Ford car has done an awful lot of harm to the unions. . . . ​As long as men have enough money to buy a s­ econd-​­hand Ford and tires and gasoline, they’ll be out on the road and paying no attention to union meetings.” Employers often required workers to sign “­yellow-​­dog” contracts, which forced them to agree not to join a union. Owners also used labor spies, blacklists, and intimidation to block unions. Some employers, such as Henry Ford, tried to kill the unions with kindness by introducing programs of “industrial democracy,” guided by ­company-​­sponsored unions, or various schemes of “welfare capitalism,” such as profit sharing, bonuses, pensions, health programs, and recreational activities. The result was that union membership dropped from about 5 million in 1920 to 3.5 million in 1929 as industrial production soared and joblessness fell to 3 percent. But the a­ nti-​­union effort, led by businesses that wanted to keep wages low and unions weak, helped to create a “­purchasing-​­power crisis” whereby the working poor were not earning enough income to buy the abundance of goods being churned out by ever m ­ ore-​­productive industries. Productivity increased by 43 percent in the Roaring Twenties, but wages barely rose. In fact, large groups of hourly workers, such as miners and textile mill hands, saw their income drop. Executives used company profits to pay dividends to stockholders, invest in new equipment, and increase their own salaries, while doing little to help wage earners. In 1929, an estimated 5 percent of the nation’s workforce (executives) received ­one-​­third of the nation’s income. In other words, the m ­ uch-​­trumpeted “new economy” was not benefiting enough ­working-​­class Americans to be sustainable. The gap between income levels and purchasing power would be a major cause of the Great Depression, as the Republican formula of high tariffs, low wages, low taxes, little regulation, and ­anti-​­unionism would eventually implode.

Isolationism in Foreign Affairs
 In addition to the Senate’s rejection of American membership in the League of Nations, the postwar spirit of isolation found other expressions. George Jean Nathan, a drama critic, expressed the sentiments of many Americans when he announced that the “great problems of the ­world—​­social, political, economic

A
Republican Resurgence 1081 

 and ­theological—​­do not concern me in the slightest. . . . ​What concerns me alone is myself, and the interests of a few close friends.” Yet the desire to stay out of foreign wars did not mean that the United States could ignore its expanding global interests. As a result of the Great War, the United States had become the world’s chief banker, and American investments and loans enabled foreigners to purchase U.S. exports.

 war debts and reparations

 Probably nothing did more to heighten America’s isolationism from foreign ­affairs—​­and ­anti-​­American feelings among E ­ uropeans—​­than the complex issue of paying off huge war debts during the 1920s. In 1917, when France and Great Britain ran out of money to pay for military supplies during the First World War, the U.S. government had advanced them massive loans, first for the war effort and then for postwar reconstruction projects. Most Americans, including Andrew W. Mellon, expected the w ­ ar-​­related debts to be paid back, but Europeans had a different perception. The European Allies had held off the German army at great cost while the United States was raising an army in 1917. The British also noted that after the American Revolution, the newly independent United States had repudiated old debts to British investors; the French likewise pointed out that they had never been repaid for helping the Americans win the Revolution and gain their independence. But the most difficult challenges in the 1920s were the practical problems of repayment. To get U.S. dollars to use to pay their w ­ ar-​­related debts, European nations had to sell their goods to the United States. However, soaring American tariff rates during the 1920s made imported European goods more expensive and the ­war-​­related debts incurred by Britain and France harder to pay. The French and the British insisted that they could repay their debts to the United States only if they could collect the $33 billion in reparations owed them by defeated Germany. That was an unrealistic assumption because the German economy was in a shambles during the 1920s, ravaged by runaway inflation. Twice during the 1920s the financial strain on Germany brought the structure of international payments to the verge of collapse, and both times the international Reparations Commission called in private American bankers to work out rescue plans. Loans provided by U.S. banks thus propped up the German economy so that Germany could pay its reparations to Britain and France, thereby enabling them to pay their debts to the United States.

 attempts at disarmament

 After the Great War, many Americans decided that the best way to keep the peace was to limit the size of armies and navies. The United States had no intention of maintaining a large army

 1082  CHAPTER 24  The Reactionary Twenties

 after 1920, but under the shipbuilding program begun in 1916, it had constructed a powerful navy second only to that of Great Britain. Although neither the British nor the Americans wanted a naval armaments race, both were worried about the growth of Japanese power. To address the problem, President Harding in 1921 invited diplomats from eight nations to a peace conference in Washington, D.C., at which Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes made a blockbuster proposal. The only way out of an expensive naval arms race, he declared, “is to end it now” by eliminating scores of existing warships. He pledged that America would junk 30 battleships and cruisers and then named 36 British and Japanese warships that would also be destroyed. It was one of the most dramatic moments in diplomatic history. The stunned audience of diplomats, ambassadors, admirals, and senators stood and roared its approval. In less than fifteen minutes, one journalist reported, Hughes had destroyed more warships “than all the admirals of the world have sunk in a cycle of centuries.” Following Hughes’s lead, delegates from the United States, Britain, Japan, France, and Italy signed the ­Five-​­Power Treaty (1922), which limited the size of their navies. It was the first disarmament treaty in history. The agreement also, in effect, divided the world into regions: U.S. naval power became supreme in the Western Hemisphere, Japanese power in the western Pacific, and British power from the North Sea to Singapore.

 the ­kellogg-​­briand pact

 During and after the Great War, many Americans embraced the fanciful ideal of simply abolishing war with a stroke of a pen. In 1921, a wealthy Chicagoan founded the American Committee for the Outlawry of War. “We can outlaw this war system just as we outlawed slavery and the saloon,” said one of the more enthusiastic converts. The seductive notion of simply abolishing war culminated in the signing of the ­Kellogg-​­Briand Pact. This unique treaty started with an initiative by the French foreign minister Aristide Briand, who in 1927 proposed to Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg that the two countries agree never to go to war against each other. This ­innocent-​­seeming proposal was actually a clever ploy to draw the United States into the French security system by the back door. In any future war, for instance, such a pact would inhibit the United States from seeking reprisals in response to any French intrusions on neutral rights. Kellogg was outraged to discover that Briand had urged leaders of the American peace movement to put pressure on the government to sign the accord. Kellogg then turned the tables on Briand. He countered with a plan to have all nations sign the pact. Caught in a trap of his own making, the French

A
Republican Resurgence 1083 

 foreign minister finally agreed. The Pact of Paris (its official name), signed on August 27, 1928, declared that the signatories “renounce it [war] as an instrument of national policy.” Eventually s­ ixty-​­two nations signed the pact, but all reserved the right of “­self-​­defense” as an escape hatch. The U.S. Senate ratified the agreement by a vote of 85 to 1. One senator who voted for “this worthless, but perfectly harmless peace treaty” wrote a friend later that he feared it would “confuse the minds of many good people who think that peace may be secured by polite professions of neighborly and brotherly love.”

 the world court

 The isolationist mood in the United States was no better illustrated than in the repeated refusal by the Senate during the 1920s to approve American membership in the World Court, formally called the Permanent Court of International Justice, at The Hague in the Netherlands. Created in 1921 by the League of Nations, the World Court, composed of fifteen international judges, was intended to arbitrate disputes between nations. Presidents Harding, Coolidge, and Hoover all asked the Senate during the 1920s to approve American membership in the World Court, but the legislative body refused, for the same reasons that the Senate had refused to sign the Versailles Treaty: they did not want the United States to be bound in any way by an international organization.

 improving relations in latin america

 The isolationist attitude during the 1920s led the decade’s Republican ­presidents—​­Harding, Calvin Coolidge, and Herbert H ­ oover—​­to soothe tensions with America’s neighbors to the south, most of which harbored ­long-​­festering resentments against “Yankee imperialism.” The Harding administration agreed in 1921 to pay the republic of Colombia the $25 million it had demanded for America’s rights to the Panama Canal. In 1924, American troops left the Dominican Republic after eight years of intervention. U.S. Marines left Nicaragua in 1925 but returned a year later at the outbreak of disorder and civil war. There, in 1927, the Coolidge administration brought both parties into an agreement for U.S.-supervised elections, but one rebel leader, César Augusto Sandino, held out, and the marines stayed until 1933. The troubles in Nicaragua increased strains between the United States and Mexico. Relations had already been soured by repeated Mexican threats to expropriate American oil properties in Mexico. In 1928, however, the U.S. ambassador negotiated an agreement protecting American rights acquired before 1917. Expropriation did in fact occur in 1938, but the Mexican government agreed to reimburse American owners.

 1084  CHAPTER 24  The Reactionary Twenties

 Teapot Dome scandal In this 1924 political cartoon, Republican officials try to outrun the Teapot Dome scandal, represented by a giant steamrolling teapot, on an o ­ il-​­slicked highway.

The Harding Scandals
 As time passed, President Harding found himself increasingly distracted by scandals in his administration. Early in 1923, the head of the Veterans Bureau resigned when faced with an investigation for stealing medical and hospital supplies intended for former servicemen. A few weeks later, the legal adviser to the bureau killed himself. Soon thereafter, Jesse Smith, a colleague of Attorney General Harry M. Daugherty who was illegally selling federal paroles, pardons, and judgeships from his Justice Department office, was found shot dead in a hotel room after he had threatened to “quit the racket.” Then, Daugherty himself was accused of selling for personal gain German assets seized after the war. When asked to testify about the matter, he refused on the grounds that doing so might incriminate him. The most serious of the scandals was called the “Teapot Dome Affair.” The Teapot Dome was a g­ overnment-​­owned oil field in Wyoming that p ­ rovided

A
Republican Resurgence 1085 

 reserve fuel for warships. After Harding moved administrative control of the oil field from the Department of the Navy to the Department of the Interior, Secretary of the Interior Albert B. Fall, deeply in debt and eight years overdue in paying his taxes, began signing overly generous federal contracts with close friends who were executives of petroleum companies that wanted access to the oil. In doing so, Fall took bribes of about $400,000 from an oil tycoon. Fall was convicted of conspiracy and bribery and sentenced to a year in prison, the first former cabinet official to serve time because of misconduct in office. How much Harding knew of the scandals remains unclear, but he knew enough to be troubled. “My God, this is a hell of a job!” he confided to a journalist. “I have no trouble with my enemies; I can take care of my enemies all right. But my damn friends, my ­God-​­damn friends. . . . ​They’re the ones that keep me walking the floor nights!” In 1923, Harding left on what would be his last journey, a speaking tour to the West Coast and a trip to the Alaska Territory. Along the way, he discussed with Herbert Hoover, the secretary of commerce, what he should do about the scandal involving Albert Fall. Hoover gave the correct response: “Publish it, and at least get credit for integrity on your side.” Before Harding had time to act on such advice, he suffered an attack of food poisoning in Seattle, then seemed to be recovering, only to die in San Francisco. He was ­fifty-​­seven years old. Largely as a result of Harding’s corrupt associates, his administration came to be viewed as one of the worst in history. Even Hoover admitted that Harding was not “a man with either the experience or the intellectual quality that the position needed” and that he was unable to admit or resolve the “terrible corruption by his playmates.” More recent assessments, however, suggest that the scandals obscured Harding’s accomplishments. He led the nation out of the turmoil of the postwar years and helped create the economic boom of the 1920s. He endorsed diversity and civil rights and was a forceful proponent of women’s rights. Still, even Harding’s foremost scholarly defender admits that he lacked good judgment and “probably should never have been president.”

Coolidge Conservatism
 The news of Harding’s death reached Vice President Calvin Coolidge when he was visiting his father in the isolated village of Plymouth Notch, Vermont, his birthplace. There, at 2:47 a.m. on August 3, 1923, Colonel John Coolidge, a farmer and merchant, issued the presidential oath of office to his son. Calvin Coolidge, born on the fourth of July in 1872, was a throwback to an earlier era. A puritan in his personal life, he was horrified by the j­azzed-​­up

 1086  CHAPTER 24  The Reactionary Twenties

 Roaring Twenties. He sincerely believed in the ideals of personal integrity and devotion to public service, and, like Harding, he was an evangelist for capitalism and minimal government regulation of business.

 an inactive president

 Although Coolidge had won every political race he had entered, beginning in 1898, he had never loved the limelight. Shy and awkward, he was a man of famously few ­words—​­hence, his nickname, “Silent Cal.” Voters liked his uprightness, his ­straight-​­talking style, and his personal humility. He was a simple, direct man of strong principles and intense patriotism who championed ­self-​­discipline and hard work. Alice Roosevelt Longworth said the atmosphere in the Coolidge White House compared to that of Harding was “as different as a New England front parlor is from the back room in a speak easy.” Coolidge, she quipped, looked like he had been “weaned on a pickle.” As a state senator in Massachusetts, Coolidge had often aligned himself with Republican progressives. He voted for women’s suffrage, a state income tax, a minimum wage for female workers, and salary increases for public school teachers. By the time he entered the White House, however, he had abandoned most of those causes. Coolidge was determined not to be an activist president. Walter Lippmann, the foremost political journalist of the twenties, wryly observed that “it is a grim, determined, alert inactivity, which keeps Mr. Coolidge occupied constantly.” To Coolidge, activist presidents created more problems than solutions. Unlike Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson, he knew he was “not a great man.” Nor did he have an ambitious program to push through Congress. “­Four-​­fifths of our troubles,” Coolidge believed, “would disappear if we would sit down and keep still.” Following his own logic, he insisted on twelve hours of sleep and a Calvin Coolidge “Silent Cal” was so lengthy afternoon nap. The irreverent inactive as president that when he died journalist H. L. Mencken claimed that in 1933, American humorist Dorothy Coolidge “slept more than any other Parker remarked, “How could they tell?” president.”

A
Republican Resurgence 1087 

 evangelist for capitalism

 Americans embraced the unflappability and unstained integrity of Silent Cal. He was refreshingly simple and direct, a man of strong principles, intense patriotism, pinched frugality, and few words. He promoted his regressive conservatism with a ruthless consistency. Even more than Harding, Coolidge linked the nation’s welfare with the success of big business. “The chief business of the American people is business,” he preached. “The man who builds a factory builds a temple. The man who works there worships there.” Coolidge famously declared that “wealth is the chief end of man.” With the help of Treasury Secretary Mellon and Republican-controlled Congresses, Coolidge continued Harding’s efforts to lower income tax rates. Where Harding had sought to balance the interests of labor, agriculture, and industry, he focused on promoting industrial development by limiting federal regulation of business and industry and reducing taxes. The nation had too many laws, Coolidge insisted, and “we would be better off if we did not have any more.” True to his word, he vetoed fifty acts of Congress. As a journalist said, “In a great day of y­ es-​­men, Calvin Coolidge was a ­no-​­man.” After having dinner with the president at the White House, Colonel House, the prominent Democrat, decided that “he has more ability than I had given him credit for, but he has little imagination and no initiative. He will make a safe President,” but would not do “anything brilliant or spectacular.” Coolidge was also “obsessed” with reducing federal spending, even to the point of issuing government workers only one pencil at a ­time—​­and only after they turned in the stub of the old pencil. His fiscal frugality and p ­ ro-​­business stance led the Wall Street Journal to rejoice: “Never before, here or anywhere else, has a government been so completely fused with business.” In filling out Harding’s unexpired term, Calvin Coolidge distanced himself from the scandals of the administration by putting in charge of the prosecutions two lawyers of undoubted integrity. A man of honesty and ability, he was a good administrator who delegated well and managed Republican factions adroitly.

 the election of 1924

 Coolidge restored the dignity of the presidency while capably managing the warring Republican factions. He easily gained the party’s 1924 presidential nomination. Meanwhile, the Democrats again fell to fighting among themselves, prompting humorist Will Rogers’s classic statement that “I am a member of no organized political party. I am a Democrat.” The party’s fractiousness reflected the ongoing divisions between urban and rural America, North and South. The nominating convention split down the middle on a proposal to express disapproval of Ku Klux Klan bigotry. It then took 103 ballots to decide on a

 1088  CHAPTER 24  The Reactionary Twenties

 presidential candidate: former ambassador John W. Davis, a prominent Wall Street lawyer from West Virginia who could nearly outdo Coolidge in his l­ imited-​­government conservatism. While the Democrats bickered, rural populists and urban progressives decided to abandon both major parties, as they had done in 1912. Reorganizing the old Progressive party, they nominated Robert M. “Fighting Bob” La Follette for president. As a Republican senator, La Follette had voted against the 1917 declaration of war against Germany. Now, in addition to the Progressives, he won the support of the Socialist party and the American Federation of Labor. In the 1924 election, Coolidge swept both the popular and the electoral votes by decisive majorities. Davis and the Democrats took only the solidly Democratic South, and La Follette carried only Wisconsin, his home state. The popular vote went 15.7 million for Coolidge, 8.4 million for Davis, and 4.8 million for La F ­ ollette—​­the largest popular vote ever polled by a ­third-​ ­party candidate up to that time. Coolidge’s big victory represented the height of postwar political conservatism. Business executives interpreted the Republican victory as an endorsement of their influence on government, and Coolidge saw the economy’s surging prosperity as confirmation of his aggressive support of the interests of business.

The Rise of Herbert Hoover
 During the twenties, the drive for industrial efficiency, which had been a prominent theme among progressives, powered the wheels of mass production and consumption and became a cardinal belief of Republican leaders. Herbert Hoover, secretary of commerce in the Harding and Coolidge cabinets, was himself a remarkable success story. Born into an Iowa farm family in 1874, orphaned at age eight, and raised by Quaker uncles in Iowa and Oregon, he was a shy but industrious “loner” who graduated from Stanford University and became a ­world-​­renowned mining engineer, oil tycoon, financial wizard, and multimillionaire before the age of forty. His meteoric success and genius for managing difficult tasks bred in him a s­ elf-​­confidence that bordered on conceit. S­ hort-​­tempered and quick to take offense, Hoover had to have complete control of any project he managed. In his twenties, he was already planning to be president of the United States.

 a progressive conservative

 After applying his managerial skills to the Food Administration during the Great War, Hoover served with

A
Republican Resurgence 1089 

 the U.S. delegation at the Versailles peace conference. He idolized Woodrow Wilson and supported American membership in the League of Nations. A young Franklin Roosevelt, then assistant secretary of the navy, was dazzled by Hoover, the man he would eventually defeat in the presidential election of 1932. In 1920, Roosevelt said that Hoover was “certainly a wonder [boy], and I wish we could make him President of the United States.” Hoover, however, soon disappointed Roosevelt by declaring himself a Republican “progressive conservative.” In a book titled American Individualism (1922), Hoover wrote of an “ideal of service” that went beyond “rugged individualism” to promote the greater good. He wanted government officials to encourage business leaders to forgo “cutthroat competition” and engage in “voluntary cooperation” by forming trade associations that would share information and promote standardization and efficiency. As secretary of commerce during the 1920s, Hoover transformed the small Commerce Department into the government’s most dynamic agency. He looked for new markets for business, created a Bureau of Aviation to promote the new airline industry, and established the Federal Radio Commission.

 the business of farming

 During the 1920s, agriculture remained the weakest sector in the economy. The wartime boom fed by agricultural exports lasted into 1920 before commodity prices collapsed as European agricultural production returned to prewar levels. Overproduction brought

 Farming technology Mechanization became increasingly important in early ­t wentieth-​ ­century agriculture. Here, farmers pose alongside their new equipment, ca. 1920.

 1090  CHAPTER 24  The Reactionary Twenties

 lower prices for crops that persisted into 1923, and after that, improvement was spotty. A bumper cotton crop in 1926 resulted only in a price collapse and an early taste of depression in much of the South, where foreclosures and bankruptcies spread. Yet the most successful farms, like the most successful corporations, were getting larger, more efficient, and more mechanized. By 1930, about 13 percent of all farmers had tractors; the proportion was even higher on the western plains. Better plows, harvesters, combines, and other machines accompanied improved crop yields, fertilizers, and methods of animal breeding. Most farmers, however, were still struggling to survive. They asked for political help, and in 1924, Senator Charles L. McNary of Oregon and Representative Gilbert N. Haugen of Iowa introduced the first ­McNary-​­Haugen bill, which sought to secure “equality for agriculture in the benefits of the protective tariff.” The proposed bill called for surplus American crops to be sold on the world market to raise prices in the home market. The goal was to achieve “parity”—that is, to raise domestic prices so that farmers would have the same purchasing power relative to the prices they had enjoyed between 1909 and 1914, a time viewed as a golden age of American agriculture. The ­McNary-​­Haugen bill passed both houses of Congress in 1927 but was vetoed by President Coolidge, who dismissed it as unsound and unconstitutional. The process was repeated in 1928. In a broader sense, however, ­McNary-​­Haugenism did not fail. The debates over the bill made the “farm problem” a national policy issue and defined it as a matter of surpluses. Moreover, the evolution of the ­McNary-​­Haugen plan revived the idea of a political alliance between the rural South and the West, a coalition that in the next decade would have a dominant influence on national farm policy.

 the 1928 election: hoover versus smith

On August 2,
 1927, while on vacation in the Black Hills of South Dakota, President Coolidge suddenly announced, “I do not choose to run for President in 1928.” His decision surprised the nation and cleared the way for Hoover to win the Republican nomination. The party’s platform took credit for the nation’s longest period of sustained prosperity, the government’s cost cutting, debt and tax reduction, and the high tariffs (“as vital to American agriculture as . . . ​to manufacturing”) designed to “protect” American businesses from foreign competition. The Democratic nomination went to ­ four-​­ term New York governor Alfred E. Smith, called the “Happy Warrior” by Franklin D. Roosevelt in his nominating speech. The candidates presented sharply different images: Hoover, the successful businessman and bureaucratic manager from an Iowa farm, and Smith, a professional Irish American politician from New York City’s Lower East

A
Republican Resurgence 1091 

 Campaign sheet music The sheet music for the Democratic nominee, Alfred E. Smith (left), and the Republican nominee, Herbert Hoover (right), drew on popular tunes and motifs of the time.

 Side. To ­working-​­class Democrats in northern cities, Smith was a hero, the poor grandson of Irish Catholic immigrants who had worked himself up to governor of the most populous state. His outspoken criticism of Prohibition also endeared him to the Irish, Italians, and others who wanted to have a drink at a saloon. On the other hand, as the first Roman Catholic nominated for president by a major party, a product of New York’s ­machine-​­run politics, and a “wet” on Prohibition (in direct opposition to his party’s platform), Smith represented all that was opposed by southern and western rural ­Democrats—​­as well as most rural and s­ mall-​­town Republicans. A Kansas newspaper editor declared that the “whole puritan civilization, which has built a sturdy, orderly nation, is threatened by Smith.” The Ku Klux Klan issued a “Klarion Kall for a Krusade” against him, mailing thousands of postcards proclaiming that “Alcohol” Smith, the Catholic New Yorker, was the Antichrist. While Hoover stayed above the fray, reminding Americans of their unparalleled prosperity and promising a “job for every man,” Smith was forced to deal with constant criticism. He denounced his opponents for injecting “bigotry, hatred, intolerance and ­un-​­American sectarian division” into the campaign.

 1092  CHAPTER 24  The Reactionary Twenties

 But no Democrat could have beaten Hoover in 1928. The nation was prosperous and at peace, and Hoover seemed the best person to sustain the good times. He was perhaps the ­best-​ ­trained economic mind ever to run for president, and he was widely viewed as the brilliant engineer “who never failed.” On Election Day, Hoover, the first Quaker to be president, won in a landslide, with 21 million popular votes to Smith’s 15 million and an electoral college majority of 444 to 87. He even penetrated the Democrats’ Solid South, winning Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, Florida, and Texas, leaving Smith only six Deep South Herbert Hoover “I have no fears for the future of our country,” Hoover told the states plus Massachusetts and Rhode nation at his inauguration in 1929. Island. Republicans also kept control of both houses of Congress. Hidden in the results, however, was a glimpse of hope for Democrats. Overall, Smith’s vote total, especially strong in the largest cities, doubled that of John Davis four years earlier. In 1932, Franklin D. Roosevelt would build upon that momentum to win back the presidency for the Democrats. But for now, Hoover was in command. Coolidge, however, was skeptical that Hoover could sustain the good times. He quipped that the “Wonder Boy” had offered him “unsolicited advice for six years, all of it bad.” Coolidge’s doubts about Hoover’s political abilities would prove all too accurate, as the new president would soon be struck by an economic earthquake that would test all of his ­skills—​­and expose his weaknesses as a leader.

The Causes of the Great Depression
 Herbert Hoover’s election in 1928 boosted the hopes of investors in what had come to be called “the Great Bull Market.” Since 1924, the prices of stock shares invested in U.S. companies had steadily risen. Beginning in 1927, prices soared further on wings of reckless speculation driven by a mass mania unmatched in history. In 1919, some 317 million shares of stock changed hands; in 1929, the

The Causes of the Great Depression  1093


 number was more than a billion. Much of the nation’s total capital was sucked into the stock market. Treasury Secretary Andrew W. Mellon’s tax reductions had given people more money to spend or invest, and much of it went into the stock market. In some respects, the stock market had become the economy. In April 1929, Hoover voiced concern about the “orgy of mad speculation” in the stock market and urged investors to be more ­cautious—​­while privately telling his own broker to sell many of his stock holdings.

 the stock market

 What made it so easy for hundreds of thousands of people to invest in stocks was the common practice of buying “on margin”—that is, an investor could make a small cash down payment (the “margin”) on shares of stock and borrow the rest from a stockbroker, who held the stock certificates as security in case the price plummeted. If stock prices rose, as they did in 1927, 1928, and most of 1929, the investor made enough profits to pay for the “margin loan” and reinvest the rest. But if the stock price declined and the buyer failed to meet a “margin call” for cash to pay off the broker’s loan, the broker could sell the stock at a much lower price to cover the loan. By August 1929, stockbrokers were lending investors more than ­two-​­thirds of the face value of the stocks they were buying. Yet few people seemed concerned, and stock prices kept rising. Despite the soaring stock market, there were signs that the economy was weakening. By 1927, steel production, residential construction, and automobile sales were slowing, as was the rate of consumer spending. By m ­ id-​­1929, industrial production, employment, and other measures of economic activity were also declining. Still, the stock market rose. Then, in early September 1929, the speculative bubble burst when the stock market fell sharply. By the middle of October, world markets had gone into a steep decline. Still, most investors remained upbeat. The nation’s foremost economist, Irving Fisher of Yale University, told investors on October 17 that “stock prices have reached what looks like a permanently high plateau.” Five days later, a leading bank president assured reporters that there was “nothing fundamentally wrong with the stock market or with the underlying business and credit structure.”

 the crash

 The next week, however, stock market values wobbled, then tumbled again, triggering a wild scramble among terrified investors. As they rushed to sell their shares, the decline in stock prices accelerated. On Black Tuesday, October 29—the worst day in the stock market’s history to that ­point—​­widespread panic set in. Stock prices went into free fall, and brokers found themselves flooded with stocks they could not sell. On that day, investors lost $15 billion. By the end of the month, they had lost $50 billion.

 1094  CHAPTER 24  The Reactionary Twenties

 An atmosphere of gloom settled over the financial community. “Life would no longer be, ever again, all fun and games,” comedian Harpo Marx sighed as he anticipated the onset of the worst depression in history. Even the zany Marx Brothers movies during the thirties could not “laugh the big bad wolf of the Depression out of the public mind.” The carefree ­pleasure-​­seeking of the Jazz Age ended not with a whimper but with the booming crash on Wall Street. Fear and uncertainty spread like a virus across the nation and the world. Wild rumors circulated of fortunes lost and careers ruined. Investors who had borrowed heavily to buy stocks were now forced to sell their holdings at huge losses so they could pay their debts. Some stockbrokers and investors committed suicide. In New York, the president of a bankrupt cigar company jumped off the ledge of a hotel, and two business partners joined hands and leaped to their deaths from the Ritz Hotel. Room clerks in Manhattan hotels began asking guests at registration if they wanted a room for jumping or sleeping. The national economy began to sputter and stumble. In 1930, at least 26,355 businesses shut down; even more failed the following year. The resulting slowdown in economic growth, called a recession, became so severe and ­long-​­lasting that it came to be known as the Great Depression. But the collapse of the stock market did not cause the Great Depression. Rather, it revealed that the prosperity of the 1920s had been built on weak foundations. The stock market crash had the added effect of creating a psychological panic that accelerated the economic decline. Frightened of losing everything, people rushed to take their money out of banks and out of the stock market. Such behavior only made things worse. By 1932, more than 9,000 banks had closed as the nation’s formerly robust economy experienced a shocking collapse.

Why the Economy Collapsed
 What were the underlying causes of the Great Depression? Most scholars emphasize a combination of interrelated elements. The economy had actually begun to fall into a recession months before the stock market crash. Put most simply, the once roaring economy fell victim to overproduction and underconsumption. During the twenties, manufacturing production increased 43 percent, but the purchasing power of consumers did not grow nearly as fast. In essence, the economy was producing more and more products that consumers could not afford to buy, and too many people had been borrowing too much money for unproductive purposes, such as speculating in the stock market.

The Causes of the Great Depression  1095


 Bank run As news of the Great Crash spread across the world, people rushed to banks to withdraw their deposits. The line for this Millbury, Massachusetts, savings bank wraps around the building.

 Too many business owners had taken large profits while denying wage increases to employees. By plowing profits into business expansion, executive salaries, and stock dividends rather than wage increases, employers created a growing imbalance between production and consumption, supply and demand. Because union membership plummeted during the twenties, organized labor no longer exerted as much leverage with management over wage increases. ­Two-​­thirds of families in 1929 earned less than $2,000 annually, an amount said by economists to provide “only basic necessities.” At the same time that the stock market was crashing, factories were reducing production or shutting down altogether. From 1929 to 1933, U.S. economic output (called gross domestic product, or GDP) dropped almost 27 percent. By 1932, o ­ ne-​­quarter of the workforce was out of work. As the financial and industrial sectors collapsed, the farm sector stagnated. Farm incomes had soared during the Great War because the European nations needed American grains, beef, and pork. Eager to sustain their prosperity, farmers took out mortgages to buy more acreage or equipment to boost output. Increasing production during the twenties, however, led to lower prices for grains and livestock. To make matters worse, record harvests in the summer and fall of 1929

 1096  CHAPTER 24  The Reactionary Twenties

 caused prices for corn, wheat, and cotton to fall precipitously, pinching the income of farmers with mounting debts.

 government’s role

 Government policies also contributed to the Depression. High tariffs hurt the economy by reducing foreign trade. Like most Republican presidents, Herbert Hoover supported congressional efforts to raise tariffs on imported goods to keep out foreign competition. The S­ moot-​­Hawley Tariff of 1930, authored by Republicans Reed Owen Smoot and Willis C. Hawley, was intended to help the farm sector by raising tariff barriers on farm products imported into the United States. But a swarm of corporate lobbyists convinced Congress to add hundreds of new imported manufactured items to the tariff bill. More than 1,000 economists urged Hoover to veto the tariff bill because its logic was flawed: by trying to “protect” American farmers from foreign competition, the bill would actually raise prices on most raw materials and consumer products. And by reducing European imports into the United States, the bill would make it much harder for France and Great Britain to repay their war debts. Hoover signed the bill anyway, causing another steep drop in the stock market. The ­Smoot-​­Hawley Tariff also prompted other countries to retaliate by passing tariffs of their own, thereby making it more difficult for American farms and businesses to sell their products abroad. U.S. exports plummeted, worsening the Depression. Another factor contributing to the Great Depression was the stance of the Federal Reserve Board (“the Fed”), the government agency that served as a “central bank” by managing the nation’s money supply and interest rates. Instead of expanding the money supply to generate growth, the Federal Reserve did the reverse, reducing the money supply out of concern for possible inflation in consumer prices. Between 1929 and 1932, the money supply shrank by a third, leading almost 10,000 small banks to ­close—​­and take millions of their depositors with them into bankruptcy.

 the impact of europe

 A final cause of the Depression was the chaotic state of the European economy, which had never fully recovered from the Great War. During the late 1920s, nations such as Great Britain, France, Spain, and Italy slowed their purchases of American goods as their economies began slowly recovering. Meanwhile, the German economy continued to flounder. A related factor was the inability of European nations to pay their war debts to each other—and to the United States. The American government insisted that the $11 billion it had loaned the Allies be repaid, but Great Britain and France had no money. They were forced to borrow huge sums ($5 billion) from U.S. banks, which only increased their overall indebtedness. After the stock market crash in October 1929, American banks could no longer prop up the European economies.

The Human Toll of the Depression  1097


 The Federal Reserve’s tighter monetary policy also drastically slowed the amount of American capital (money) going abroad. The German economy, which had grown dependent on loans from American banks, was devastated as American money dried up. Then the Smoot-Hawley Tariff made it even more difficult for European nations to sell their products in the United States. So as the European economy sputtered, it dragged the American economy deeper into depression.

The Human Toll of the Depression
 The Depression came to be called “Great” because its effects were so severe and long lasting. By 1932, perhaps a quarter of the U.S. population could not afford housing or adequate food. The carefree optimism of the twenties disappeared; grassroots protests erupted as the Depression worsened. Hungry people looted grocery stores, angry mobs stopped local sheriffs from foreclosing on farms, and judges were threatened at bankruptcy hearings. Some talked of revolution and radical change. “Folks are restless,” Mississippi governor Theodore Bilbo told reporters in 1931. “Communism is gaining a foothold. . . . ​In fact, I’m getting a little pink myself.” Yet for all the radical talk, few Americans embraced communism. “There was anger and rebellion among a few,” recounted an Iowa farmer, but most people lived in “helpless despair and submission.”

 unemployment and “relief”

 As the economy spiraled downward between 1930 and 1933, growing numbers of workers were fired or had their wages cut. Unemployment soared to 4 million in 1930, then 8 million in 1931, and to 12 million by 1932. Desperate unemployed city dwellers became s­treet-​­ corner merchants. Some 6,000 jobless New Yorkers sold apples on street corners to survive. They could buy a crate of apples grown in the Pacific Northwest for $1.75. If they sold a crate of sixty apples at a nickel apiece, they could pocket $1.25. The motto of the apple sellers was, “Buy an apple a day and eat the Depression away.” Many struggling business executives and ­professionals—​­lawyers, doctors, dentists, accountants, stockbrokers, teachers, nurses, and ­engineers—​­went without food and medical care to save money and avoid the humiliation of “going on relief.” The sense of shame cut across class lines. In The Grapes of Wrath (1939), John Steinbeck’s ­best-​­selling novel about the victims of the Depression, a poor but proud woman is disgraced by accepting “charity” from the Salvation Army: “We was hungry. They made us crawl for our dinner. They took our dignity.”

 1098  CHAPTER 24  The Reactionary Twenties

 hunger

 Hard-​­pressed families went without fruit and most vegetables. Surveys of children in the nation’s public schools in 1932 showed that ­one-​ ­quarter suffered from malnutrition. The U.S. Public Health Service revealed that the families of unemployed workers had 66 percent more illnesses than the families of employed workers. In 1931, New York City hospitals reported about 100 cases of death by starvation. Hungry people by the millions lined up at “soup kitchens,” where churches and charities distributed minimal amounts of food and water. O ­ thers rummaged through trash cans or garbage dumps. In Detroit, “we saw the city at its worst,” wrote Louise V. Armstrong. “One vivid, gruesome moment of those dark days we shall never forget. We saw a crowd of some fifty men fighting over a barrel of garbage which had been set outside the back door of a restaurant. American citizens fighting over scraps of food like animals!”

 homelessness

 The contraction of the economy especially squeezed debtors who had monthly mortgages to pay. A thousand Americans per day lost

 The morning news in a Chicago shantytown In response to the economic devastation of the Great Depression, numerous shantytowns emerged in cities across the country to house the ­recently-​­homeless; here, a man reads a newspaper outside his makeshift dwelling in Chicago.

The Human Toll of the Depression  1099


 their homes to foreclosure, and millions were forced to move in with ­relatives or friends. At first, the poor made homeless by the Depression were usually placed in almshouses, also called poorhouses or workhouses. By 1933, however, the homeless overwhelmed the small number of public facilities; more than 40 percent of home mortgages were in default. People were forced to live in culverts, under bridges, on park benches, and in doorways and police stations. To make matters worse, the poor were subject to frequent abuse and arrest. The constitutions of fourteen states even banned paupers from voting. Millions of homeless people, mostly men, took to living on the road or the rails. These hobos, or tramps, walked, hitchhiked in cars, or sneaked onto empty railway cars and rode from town to town. One railroad, the Missouri Pacific, counted 200,000 vagrants living in its empty boxcars in 1931. The following year, the Southern Pacific Railroad reported that it had evicted 683,457 people from its freight trains. A black military veteran recalled life as a hobo: “Black and white, it didn’t make any difference who you were, ’cause everybody was poor. . . . ​They didn’t have no mothers or sisters, they didn’t have no home; they were dirty, they had overalls on, they didn’t have no food, they didn’t have anything.”

 desperate responses

 As always, those hardest hit were the most disadvantaged ­groups—​­immigrants, women, farmers, the urban unemployed, Native Americans, and African Americans. Desperate conditions led desperate people to do desperate things. Crime soared, as did s­ treet-​­corner begging, homelessness, and prostitution. Although the divorce rate dropped during the decade, in part because ­couples could not afford to live separately or pay the legal fees to obtain a divorce, many jobless husbands simply deserted their wives and children. “You don’t know what it’s like when your husband’s out of work,” a woman told a reporter. “He’s gloomy and unhappy all the time. Life is terrible. You must try all the time to keep him from going crazy.” With their future so u ­ ncertain, married couples often decided not to have children, and b ­ irthrates plummeted. Many struggling parents sent their children to live with relatives or friends. Some 900,000 children simply left home and joined the growing army of homeless “tramps.” During the Great Depression, for the first time ever, more people left the United States than arrived as immigrants.

 plight of working women

 The Depression put women in a peculiar position. By 1932, an estimated 20 percent of working women were unemployed, a slightly lower percentage than men. Because women held a disproportionate number of the ­lowest-​­paying jobs, they were often able to keep them. Even so, many women also had the added burden of keeping their families together emotionally with their husbands out of work. Magazines

 1100  CHAPTER 24  The Reactionary Twenties

 Just dropping off a résumé In October 1938, the federal government opened six custodian positions and 15,000 African American women lined up overnight to turn in their applications. Pictured here is a policeman leaping over a hedge to keep the crowd under control.

 published numerous articles about the challenge of maintaining households when the husband had been “unmanned” by losing his job. As the Depression deepened, however, married women in the workforce became the primary targets of layoffs. Some ­twenty-​­six states passed laws prohibiting their employment. The reasoning was that a married ­woman—​­who presumably had a husband to take care of h ­ er—​­should not “steal” a job from a man supporting a family. It was acceptable for single women to find jobs because these were usually considered “women’s work”: salesgirls, beauticians, schoolteachers, secretaries, and nurses. The job market for African American women was even more restricted, with most of them working as maids, cooks, or laundresses. In a desperate attempt to create jobs for unemployed men, many employers and even whole states adopted policies barring married women from employment. For example, ­three-​­fourths of the public school systems across the nation during the Great Depression fired women teachers who

The Human Toll of the Depression  1101


 got married. As a legislator commented, the working woman in D ­ epression-​ ­era America was “the first orphan in the storm.”

 minorities

 Most African Americans still lived in the eleven southern states of the former Confederacy, where the ­farm-​­dominated economy was depressed before 1929 and worsened during the Great Depression. African Americans in the South earned their meager livelihoods from farming, as tenants and sharecroppers. Pervasive racial discrimination kept blacks out of the few labor unions in the South and consigned them to the most menial, ­lowest-​­paying jobs. They also continued to be the victims of violence and intimidation. Most blacks were still excluded from voting and were segregated in public places like hotels and trains. Already living in poverty, they were among the hardest hit by the Depression. As a blues song called “Hard Times Ain’t Gone Nowhere” revealed, “Hard times don’t worry me; I was broke when it first started out.” Some 3 million rural blacks in the South lived in cramped cabins without electricity, running water, or bathrooms. In many mills, factories, mines, and businesses, the philosophy of “last hired, first fired” meant that the people who could least afford to be jobless were fired first. Blacks who had left the South to take factory jobs in the North were among the first to be laid off. Blacks had the highest rate of joblessness in the early years of the Great Depression. “At no time in the history of the Negro since slavery,” reported the Urban League, “has his economic and social outlook seemed so discouraging.” Churches and other charity organizations gave aid, but some refused to provide support for blacks, Mexicans, and Asians. Impoverished whites found themselves competing with local Hispanics and Asians for seasonal farmwork in the cotton fields or orchards of large corporate farms. Many Chinese, Japanese, and Filipino farm laborers moved to cities. Mexicans, who had come to the United States during the 1920s, were also mostly migrant farmworkers, traveling from farm to farm to work during harvest and planting seasons of different crops. They settled in California, New Mexico, Arizona, Colorado, Texas, and the midwestern states. As economic conditions worsened, government officials called for the deportation of ­Mexican-​­born Americans to avoid the cost of providing them with public services. By 1935, more than 500,000 Mexican Americans (250,000 from Texas alone) and their ­American-​­born children were deported to Mexico. Everywhere one looked in the early 1930s, people were suffering. City, county, and state governments quickly proved incapable of managing the spreading misery. As Americans turned to the federal government for ideas and answers, Herbert Hoover, the “Great Engineer,” struggled to provide adequate responses to the unprecedented crisis of the Great Depression.

CHAPTER REVIEW
Summary • 
 The Reactionary Twenties With the end of the Great War, a renewed surge of immigration led to a wave of nativism. To Americans who feared that many immigrants were political radicals, the Sacco and Vanzetti case confirmed their suspicions. Nativists persuaded Congress to restrict future immigration, particularly from eastern and southern Europe, in the Immigration Act of 1924. Other reactionary movements reflected the feeling of many white Protestants that their religion and way of life were under attack. A revived Ku Klux Klan promoted hatred of Catholics, Jews, immigrants, Communists, and liberals, as well as African Americans. Fundamentalist Protestants campaigned against teaching evolution in public schools. Their efforts culminated in the 1925 Scopes Trial in Dayton, Tennessee, ­where ​­a high school teacher was convicted of violating a state law prohibiting the teaching of evolution. Along with progressive reformers, ­conservative Protestants also supported the nationwide Prohibition of alcoholic beverages that had gone into effect in 1920, despite widespread disregard for the law and the increased criminal activity and violence associated with it. Union membership declined in the 1920s as businesses adopted new techniques (such as the ­so-​­called open shop) to resist unions, a conservative Supreme Court rolled back workers’ rights, and workers themselves lost interest in organizing amid the general prosperity of the decade.

•


 Republican Resurgence Although the Eighteenth Amendment (paving the way for Prohibition) and the Nineteenth Amendment (guaranteeing women’s right to vote) marked the culmination of progressivism at the national level, the movement lost much of its appeal as disillusionment with the Great War and its results created a public preference for disarmament and isolationism, stances reflected in the F ­ ive-​­Power Treaty of 1922. Warren G. Harding’s landslide presidential victory in 1920 was based on his call for a “return to normalcy.” Harding and his fellow Republicans, including his vice president and successor, Calvin Coolidge, followed policies advocated by Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon that emphasized lowering taxes and government spending as well as raising tariffs to protect domestic industries. The plan succeeded spectacularly in reviving the economy. Harding died suddenly in 1923, soon after news broke about the Teapot Dome Affair involving a ­government-​­owned oil field in Wyoming, one of many incidents of corruption growing out of Harding’s appointments. Coolidge, an austere, frugal man who identified with the interests of business, restored trust in the presidency and won reelection in a landslide in 1924. In the 1928 presidential election, Herbert Hoover, secretary of commerce under Harding and Coolidge, won a third straight decisive victory for the Republicans.

•


 The Great Depression The 1929 stock market crash revealed the structural flaws in the economy, but it was not the only cause of the Great Depression (1929–1941). During the twenties, business owners did not provide adequate wage increases for workers, thus preventing consumers’ “purchasing power” from keeping up



 with increases in production. The nation’s agricultural sector also suffered from overproduction throughout the decade. Government ­policies—​­such as high tariffs that helped to reduce international trade and the reduction of the nation’s money supply as a means of dealing with the financial ­panic—exacerbated the emerging economic depression.

•


 The Human Toll of the Depression Thousands of banks and businesses closed, and millions of homes and jobs were lost. By the early 1930s, many people were homeless and hopeless, begging on street corners and sleeping in doorways. Many state laws and business practices discouraged the employment of married women, and discrimination against African Americans, Native Americans, Hispanics, and Asian Americans in hiring was widespread.

Chronology




















 Prohibition begins Sacco and Vanzetti trial Warren G. Harding is elected president Washington Naval Conference and ­Five-​­Power Treaty Congress passes Emergency Immigration Act Teapot Dome scandal becomes public President Harding dies in office and is succeeded by Calvin Coolidge Congress passes Immigration Act Coolidge is reelected president Scopes “monkey trial” Sacco and Vanzetti are executed Herbert Hoover is elected president Stock market crashes in late October

Key Terms
 nativism p. 1063

 “return to normalcy” p. 1075

Immigration Act of 1924 p. 1064


 open shop p. 1080

 Sacco and Vanzetti case p. 1065

Teapot Dome Affair p. 1084


Scopes Trial p. 1069


Great Depression (1929–1941)
 p. 1094

Prohibition p. 1071


IJK
Go to InQuizitive to see what you’ve learned—and learn what you’ve missed—with personalized feedback along the way. 




The Great
Depression
1929–1939


 Construction of a Dam (1939) One of the most famous and controversial of the artists commissioned by the New Deal’s Works Progress Administration was William Gropper, who painted this mural displayed in the Department of the Interior building in Washington, D.C. Based on his observations of dam construction on the Columbia and Colorado Rivers, Gropper illustrates the triumph and brotherhood that emerged from the New Deal’s massive public projects during the Great Depression.

T


 he year 1929 dawned with high hopes. Rarely had a new president entered office with greater expectations. In fact, Herbert Hoover, a man of boundless s­ elf-​­confidence, was worried that people viewed him as “a superman; that no problem is beyond my capacity.” He was right to be concerned. People did consider him a ­superman—“the man who had never failed”—a dedicated public servant whose engineering genius and business savvy would ensure continued prosperity. In 1929, more Americans were working than ever before and earning record levels of income. But that was about to change. The Great Depression, which began at the end of 1929, brought the worst of times. No business slump had been so deep, so long, or so painful. By 1932, one of every four Americans was unemployed; in many large cities, nearly half of the adults were out of work. Millions of others saw their working hours and wages reduced. Some 500,000 people had lost homes or farms because they could not pay their mortgages. Over 4,000 banks failed in the first two months of 1933, with more than $3.6 billion in lost deposits. Record numbers of people were out of work, out of money, and out of hope. One California woman wrote that she was the “mother of seven children, and utterly heart broken, in that they are hungry, have only 65¢ in money. The father is in Los Angeles trying to find something to do.” What made the Great Depression so severe and so lasting was its global nature. In 1929, Europe was still reeling from the Great War. Once the American economy tumbled, it sent shock waves throughout the world. Economic distress fed the rise of totalitarian r­ egimes—​­fascism and Nazism in Italy and Germany, communism in the Soviet Union. “Capitalism is dying,” theologian Reinhold Niebuhr proclaimed. “Let no one delude himself by hoping for reform from within.”

 focus questions 1. How did the Hoover administration respond to the Great Depression? 2. What were the goals and accomplishments of the First New Deal? 3. What were the major criticisms of the First New Deal? 4. How did the New Deal evolve? How did it transform the role of the federal government in American life?



