 1216  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 unthinkably horrific, which in turn made national leaders more cautious in handling disputes.

Truman and the Cold War
 In April 1945, less than three months after Harry S. Truman had begun his new role as vice president, Eleanor Roosevelt calmly informed him, “Harry, the President is dead.” When Truman asked what he could do to help her, the First Lady replied: “Is there anything we can do for you? For you are the one in trouble now.” Truman was largely unknown outside of Washington. What everyone did know, however, was that he was not Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Truman had no wealthy family, had not traveled the world, and had not attended Harvard or Columbia. In fact, he had not gone to college. Born in 1884 in western Missouri, Truman grew up in Independence, near Kansas City. Bookish and withdrawn, he was, he recalled, a bit of “a sissy” as a boy. He moved to his grandmother’s farm after high school, spent a few years working in Kansas City banks, and grew into an outgoing young man. During the First World War, Truman served in France as captain of an artillery battery. Afterward, he and a partner started a clothing business, but it failed miserably in the recession of 1922, leaving him in debt for the next twenty years. Truman then entered local politics under the tutelage of Kansas City’s Democratic machine. In 1934, Missouri sent him to the U.S. Senate, where he remained obscure until he chaired a committee investigating fraud in the w ­ ar-​­mobilization effort. Truman was a plain, decent, lovable man who lacked Roosevelt’s dash, charm, brilliance, and creativity. On his first full day as president, Truman was awestruck. “Boys, if you ever pray, pray for me now,” he told reporters. “I don’t know whether you fellows ever had a load of hay fall on you, but when they told me yesterday what had happened, I felt like the moon, the stars and all the planets had fallen on me.” Washington politicos had low expectations of Roosevelt’s successor. As Truman was seated waiting to be sworn in as the grieving nation’s new president, a Democratic official said “he looked to me like a very little man as he sat” in a huge leather chair. An unreflective man whose famed decisiveness was rarely troubled by doubts or moral ambiguities, Truman was famously ­short-​­tempered, profane, and dismissive, and was notorious for his scrappy press conferences. (“If you ask ­smart-​­aleck questions, I’ll give you ­smart-​­aleck answers.”) He called publisher William Randolph Hearst “the No. 1 whore monger of our time,” columnist Westbrook Pegler “the greatest character assas-

Truman and the Cold War  1217


 sin in the United States,” and Richard Nixon “a ­shifty-​­eyed ­god-​­damned liar.” The ­plain-​­speaking man from Missouri resembled his hero Andrew Jackson in his decisiveness, bluntness, folksy manner, salty language, and raw courage. Despite his lack of executive experience, Truman was confident and s­ elf-​­assured—​­and he needed to be. Managing the transition from war to peace both at home and abroad was a monumental task. He was expected to lead America into a postwar era complicated by the cold war and the need to rebuild Europe and Asia. He ended up doing better than anyone expected. A common man who be­ Harry S. Truman The successor to came president at an uncommon time, Franklin Roosevelt who led the United Truman rose above his limitations to States out of the Second World War do extraordinary things. He never pre­­ and into the Cold War. tended to be something he was not; as he admitted, he was “an ordinary human being who has been lucky.” During a visit in 1952, British leader Winston Churchill confessed to Truman that initially he had held him “in very low regard. I loathed your taking the place of Franklin Roosevelt. I misjudged you badly. Since that time, you, more than any other man, have saved Western civilization.”

 origins of the cold war

 Historians have long debated the unanswerable question: Was the United States or the Soviet Union more responsible for the onset of the cold war? The conventional view argues that the Soviets, led by Josef Stalin, a ruthless Communist dictator, set out to dominate the globe after 1945. The United States had no choice but to defend democratic capitalist values. By contrast, “revisionist” historians insist that instead of continuing Roosevelt’s efforts to collaborate with the Soviets, President Truman pursued a confrontational foreign policy that aggravated tensions. Yet such an interpretation fails to recognize that Truman inherited a deteriorating relationship with the Soviets. Both sides in the postwar world were captives of a nuclear nightmare of fear, suspicion, and posturing. In retrospect, the onset of the cold war seems to have been inevitable. America’s commitment to capitalism, political s­ elf-​­determination, and religious freedom conflicted dramatically with the Soviet Union’s preference for controlling

 1218  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 its neighbors, enforcing ideological conformity, and prohibiting religious practices. Insecurity, as much as Communist ideology, drove much of Soviet behavior after the Second World War. Russia, after all, had been invaded by Germany twice in the first half of the twentieth century, and some 23 million people died as a result. Soviet leaders were determined to create loyal nations on their borders for protection. The people of Eastern Europe were caught in the middle.

 conflicts with the soviets

 The wartime military alliance against Nazism disintegrated after 1945 as the Soviet Union violated the promises it had made at the Yalta Conference and imposed military control and the Communist political system on the nations of Eastern Europe it had liberated. On May 12, 1945, four days after victory in Europe, Winston Churchill asked Truman: “What is to happen about Europe? An iron curtain is drawn down upon [the Russian] front. We do not know what is going on behind [it].” Churchill and Truman wanted to lift the “iron curtain” and help those nations develop democratic governments. But events during the second half of 1945 dashed those expectations. As early as the spring of 1945 and continuing for the next two years, the Soviet Union systematically imprisoned half of the European continent. The Red Army ran amok, raping and killing the “liberated” citizens of Eastern Europe. Thereafter, the Soviets systematically installed “puppet” governments across central and Eastern Europe (Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and Yugoslavia). Totalitarian regimes essentially turned ­once-​­proud nations into Soviet colonies. In their ruthless pursuit of total control, the Soviets eliminated all political parties except the Communists, created secret police forces, took control of intellectual and cultural life (including the mass media), undermined the Roman Catholic Church, and organized a process of ethnic cleansing whereby whole ­populations—​­12 million Germans, as well as Poles and H ­ ungarians—​­were relocated from their homes in Eastern Europe, usually to West Germany or to prisons. More than 500,000 of the refugees died in the process. Anyone who opposed the S­ oviet-​ ­installed regimes was exiled, silenced, executed, or imprisoned. Stalin’s promises at the Yalta Conference to allow open elections in the nations of Eastern Europe controlled by Soviet armies had turned out to be lies. In a fit of candor, he admitted that “a freely elected government in any of these countries would be ­anti-​­Soviet, and that we cannot allow.” U.S. secretary of state James F. Byrnes tried to use America’s monopoly on atomic bombs to pressure the Soviets to abide by the Yalta accords. In April 1945, he suggested to President Truman that nuclear weapons “might well put us in position to dictate our own terms [with the Soviets] at the end of

The Containment Policy  1219


 the war.” The Soviets, however, paid little attention, in part because their spies had kept them informed of what American scientists had been doing and in part because they were developing their own atomic bombs. Throughout the spring of 1945, the Soviets created “friendly governments” in Eastern Europe, arguing that the United States had done the same in Italy and Japan after those nations had surrendered. The difference was that the Soviets prevented ­non-​­Communists from participating in the political process. A few days before the opening of the conference to organize the United Nations in April, Truman met with Soviet foreign minister Vyacheslav Molotov. The Soviets had just put in place a p ­ ro-​­Communist government in Poland in violation of Stalin’s pledge at Yalta to allow free elections. Truman directed Molotov to tell Stalin that the United States expected the Soviet leader to live up to his agreements. “I have never been talked to like that in my life,” Molotov angrily replied. “Carry out your agreements,” Truman snapped, “and you won’t get talked to like that.” Later, in July 1945, when Truman met Stalin at the Potsdam Conference, he wrote his mother that he had never seen “such ­pig-​­headed people as are the Russians.” He later acknowledged that the Soviets broke their promises “as soon as the unconscionable Russian Dictator [Stalin] returned to Moscow!” Truman added, with a note of embarrassment, “And I liked the little son of a bitch.”

The Containment Policy
 By the beginning of 1947, relations with the Soviet Union had grown ice cold. A year before, in February 1946, Stalin had proclaimed the superiority of the Soviet Communist system of government and declared that peace was impossible “under the present capitalist development of the world economy.” His provocative statement suggesting an inevitable war between communism and capitalism led the State Department to ask for an analysis of Soviet communism from ­forty-​­two-​­year-​­old George Frost Kennan, the ­best-​­informed expert on the Soviet Union, then working in the U.S. embassy in Moscow. Kennan responded on February 22, 1946, with a famous 5,000-word “Long Telegram”—the longest in the history of the State Department. He included considerable detail about Russian history, the pillars of Soviet policy, Stalin’s “neurotic view of world affairs,” and Russia’s historic determination to protect its western border with Europe. Kennan explained that the Soviet Union was founded on a rigid ideology (­Marxism-​­Leninism), which saw a fundamental global conflict between Communist and capitalist nations and helped Soviet rulers justify their amoral

 1220  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 actions. They could not imagine “permanent peaceful coexistence” with capitalist nations and were “fanatically” committed to the necessity of perpetual tension and conflict. In this regard, Kennan implied, Franklin Roosevelt had mistakenly assumed that his personal diplomacy with Stalin would ensure that the Soviets behaved. Kennan insisted instead that Stalin needed external enemies to maintain his totalitarian power at home. The Soviet goal, according to Kennan, was to build military strength while subverting the stability of the capitalist democracies. The best way for the United States to deal with such an ideological foe, he advised, was through patient, persistent, and firm “strategic” efforts to “contain” Soviet George F. Kennan A specialist in the expansionism, without resorting to history and behavior of the Soviet Union, war. The economic power of capitalist American diplomat George Kennan democracies was their greatest asset. developed the rationale for containment at the heart of the Truman Doctrine. Creating “unalterable counterforce” to Communist expansionism, Kennan predicted, would eventually cause “either the breakup or the gradual mellowing of Soviet power” because communism, in Kennan’s view, was an inherently unstable system that would eventually collapse. New secretary of state George C. Marshall, the austere but much revered commander of the U.S. armed forces during the war, was so impressed by Kennan’s analysis that he put him in charge of the State Department’s Policy Planning office. No other American diplomat at the time forecast so accurately what would happen to the Soviet Union some forty years later. As Kennan recalled, “my reputation was made. My voice now carried.” Kennan later acknowledged that his “Long Telegram” suffered from excessive optimism and occasional vagueness. In its broadest dimensions, its call for “firm and vigilant containment” echoed the outlook of Truman and his advisers and would guide U.S. foreign policy for decades. But how exactly were the United States and its allies to “contain” the Soviet Union’s expansionist tendencies? How should the United States respond to

The Containment Policy  1221


 Soviet aggression around the world? Kennan left the task of “containing” communism to Truman and his advisers, most of whom, unlike Kennan, considered containment to be as much a military doctrine as a political strategy. In 1946, civil war broke out in Greece between an authoritarian monarchy backed by the British and a C ­ ommunist-​­led insurgency supported by the Soviets. On February 21, 1947, the financially strapped British informed the U.S. government that they could no longer provide economic and military aid to Greece and would withdraw in five weeks. Truman quickly conferred with congressional leaders, one of whom, Republican senator Arthur Vandenburg of Michigan, warned the president that he would need to “scare the hell out of the American people” about the menace of communism to gain public support for his aid program. Truman was eager to do so, for he had grown tired of “babying the Russians.”

 the truman doctrine

On March 12, 1947, President Truman
 gave a national radio speech in which he asked Congress for $400 million for economic and military assistance for Greece and Turkey. More important, the president announced what came to be known as the Truman Doctrine. To ensure congressional support, he intentionally exaggerated the danger of a Communist takeover in Greece. Like a row of dominoes, Truman predicted, the fall of Greece would topple the other nations of the eastern Mediterranean, then Western Europe. To prevent such a catastrophe, he said, the United States must “support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures.” In this single sentence, the president established the foundation of U.S. foreign policy for the next forty years. In essence, he was declaring war on communism everywhere. In Truman’s view, shared by later presidents, the assumptions of the “domino theory” made an aggressive “containment” strategy against communism a necessity. Truman’s speech generated widespread public support. The New York Times said that his message was clear: “The epoch of isolation is ended. It is being replaced by an epoch of American responsibility.” At the State Department, Secretary of State Marshall announced that “we are now concerned with the peace of the entire world.” Still, Marshall and others feared that Truman’s speech was unnecessarily provocative. George Kennan cringed at the president’s “grandiose” commitment to “contain” communism everywhere. In Kennan’s view, Truman’s “militarized view of the Cold War” was a foolish crusade, an ­open-​­ended ideological confrontation without limits rather than a policy with an accompanying program of steps capable of implementation. Efforts to “contain” communism needed to

 1222  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 be selective rather than universal, political and economic rather than military; the United States could not intervene in every “hot spot” around the world. Walter Lippmann, the nation’s leading political journalist, characterized Truman’s policy of global a­ nti-​­communism as a “strategic monstrosity” that would entangle the United States in endless international disputes and force it to partner with ­right-​­wing ­dictatorships—​ ­as turned out to be the case. Truman and his advisers rejected such concerns. In 1947, Congress approved the president’s request for economic and military assistance to Greece and neighboring Turkey.

 the marshall plan

In the
 spring of 1947, most of postwar Europe remained broke, shattered, and desperate. Factories had been bombed to rubble; railroads and bridges had been destroyed; millions were homeless, starving, and jobless; and political unrest was growing. By 1947, Socialist and Communist parties were emerging in many European nations, including Italy, France, and Belgium. The crises among the struggling European democracies required bold action. The United States stepped into the breach. In May 1947, Secretary of State George C. Marshall delivered a speech at Harvard University in which he outlined America’s policy toward Europe in nonideological terms. Building upon suggestions given him by George Kennan and others, he called for massive financial and technical assistance to rescue Europe, including the Soviet Union. What came to be known as the Marshall Plan was intended to reconstruct the European economy, neutralize Communist insurgencies, and build up foreign markets for American products. As Truman said, “the American [capitalist] system can survive only if it is part of a world system.” But the Marshall Plan was also part of Truman’s effort to contain the expansionist tendencies “It’s the same thing” The Marshall Plan, which distributed massive amounts of economic aid throughout postwar Europe, is represented in this 1949 cartoon as a modern tractor driven by a prosperous farmer. In the foreground a poor, overworked man is yoked to an o ­ ld-​­fashioned “Soviet” plow, forced to go over the ground of the “Marshal Stalin Plan,” while Stalin himself tries to persuade others that “it’s the same thing without mechanical problems.”

The Containment Policy  1223


 of the Soviet Union by reestablishing a strong Western Europe anchored in American values. The Americans, said a British official, “want an integrated Europe looking like the United States of America.” In December 1947, Truman submitted Marshall’s proposal to Congress. Initially, Republican critics dismissed it as “New Dealism” for Europe. However, two months later, on February 25, 1948, a C ­ ommunist-​­led coup in Czechoslovakia, the last nation in Eastern Europe with a democratic government, ensured the Marshall Plan’s passage. From 1948 until 1951, the Marshall Plan provided $13 billion to sixteen European nations. The Soviet Union, however, refused to participate and forced the Eastern European countries under its ­control—​­Albania, Bulgaria, Poland, Romania, ­Yugoslavia—​­to refuse to participate as well. The Marshall Plan (officially called the European Recovery Plan) worked as hoped. By 1951, Western Europe’s industrial production had soared to 40 percent above prewar levels, and its farm output was larger than ever. England’s Economist magazine called the Marshall Plan “an act without peer in history.” It became the most successful peacetime diplomatic initiative in American history.

 divided germany

 Although the Marshall Plan drew the nations of Western Europe closer together, it increased tensions with the Soviet Union, as Stalin saw it as a way to weaken Soviet influence in the region. The breakdown of the wartime alliance between the United States and the Soviet Union also left the problem of postwar Germany unsettled. In 1945, Berlin, the German capital, had been divided into four sectors, or zones, each governed by one of the four principal allied ­nations—​­the United States, France, Great Britain, and the Soviet Union. The devastated German economy continued to languish, requiring the U.S. Army to provide food and basic necessities to millions of civilians. Slowly, the Allied occupation zones evolved into functioning governments. In 1948, the British, French, and Americans united their three administrative zones into one and developed a common currency to be used in West Germany as well as in West Berlin, a city of 2.4 million people, which was more than 100 miles inside the Soviet occupation zone of East Germany. The West Germans also organized state governments and began drafting a federal constitution. The political unification of West Germany and its economic recovery infuriated Stalin, who was determined to keep Germany weak. And the status of divided Berlin had become a powder keg. In March 1948, Stalin prevented the new West German currency from being delivered to Berlin. Then, on June 23, he ordered the Soviet army occupying eastern Germany to stop all road and

 1224  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 Family reunion A girl gives her grandmother a kiss through the barbed wire fence that divides the ­Dutch-​­German frontier in 1947.

 rail traffic into West Berlin. The blockade, he hoped, would force the United States and its allies to leave the divided city. The Americans interpreted Stalin’s blockade as a tipping point in the cold war. “When Berlin falls,” predicted General Lucius D. Clay, the U.S. Army commander in Germany, “western Germany will be next. Communism will run rampant.” The United States thus faced a dilemma: risk a third world war by using force to break the Soviet blockade or begin a humiliating retreat from West Berlin, leaving the residents to be swallowed up by communism. Truman, who prided himself on his decisiveness (“the buck stops here”), made clear his stance: “We stay in ­Berlin—​­period.” The United States announced an embargo against all goods exported from ­Soviet-​­controlled eastern Germany and began organizing a massive airlift to provide food and supplies to West Berliners. By October 1948, the U.S. and British air forces were flying in 7,000 tons of food, fuel, medicine, coal, and equipment to Berlin each day. To support the airlift and prepare for a possible war, thousands of former military pilots were called back into service. Truman revived the military draft, and Congress provided emergency funds to increase military spending.

The Containment Policy  1225


 Through the iron curtain German children greet a U.S. cargo plane as it flies into West Berlin to drop off ­much-​­needed food and supplies.

 At times it seemed that the two superpowers were on the verge of war. For all the threats and harsh words, however, the Berlin airlift went on for eleven months without any shots being fired. Finally, on May 12, 1949, the Soviets lifted their blockade, in part because bad Russian harvests had made them desperate for food grown in western Germany. The Berlin airlift was the first major “victory” for the West in the cold war, and the unprecedented efforts of the United States and Great Britain to supply West Berliners transformed most of them from defeated adversaries into devoted allies. In May 1949, as the Soviet blockade was ending, the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany) was founded. In October, the Soviet-controlled German Democratic Republic (East Germany) came into being.

 forming alliances The Soviet blockade of Berlin convinced the United States and its allies that they needed to act together to stop further Communist expansion into Western Europe. On April 4, 1949, the North Atlantic Treaty was signed by twelve nations: the United States, Great Britain, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Canada, Denmark, Iceland, Italy, Norway, and Portugal. Greece and Turkey joined the alliance in 1952, West Germany in 1955, and Spain in 1982.

 1226  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the largest defensive alliance in the world, declared that an attack against any one of the members would be considered an attack against all. The creation of NATO marked the high point of efforts to “contain” Soviet expansion. In 1949, Congress provided $1 billion in military equipment to NATO members. By joining NATO, the United ­States—​ ­for the first time since its alliance with France during the Revolutionary W ­ ar—​ ­committed itself to go to war on behalf of its allies. Isolationism was dead.

THE OCCUPATION OF GERMANY AND AUSTRIA SWEDEN

A


 DENMARK

NORTH SEA

BA
Hamburg 
WEST GERMANY

Berlin


E


U S S R
To
 USSR

Annexed
 by Poland

EAST PRUSSIA
To Poland 
O


 r de

 Joint occupation by four powers

 POLAND

 i s s e R.

Bonn


Warsaw


 r

EAST GERMANY

Rive
Ne


 BELGIUM

S


Danzig
´
(Gdansk)


Access
 corridor

Bremen


 NETHERLANDS

L


C
 TI

Lublin


Frankfurt


Iron Curtain


 SAAR

Ri


 ne

Da


 nub e

Ri v e


Rh i


 FRANCE

 ve

 r

 LUXEMBOURG

 CZECHOSLOVAKIA

 r

Munich
Vienna


 AUSTRIA

 SWITZERLAND

 HUNGARY

 ITALY

 French zone British zone

 ROMANIA

 U.S. zone Soviet zone





100 Miles


50 100 Kilometers


 YUGOSLAVIA

■
■
■


 How did the Allies decide to divide postwar Germany at the Yalta Conference? What was the “iron curtain”? Why did the Allies airlift supplies to West Berlin?

WWN64
Figure M27_1 First proof 
The Containment Policy  1227


 reorganizing the military

 The onset of the cold war and the emergence of nuclear weapons led Truman to restructure the way the U.S. armed forces were managed. In 1947, Congress passed the National Security Act, which created a Department of Defense to oversee the three military ­branches—​­the Army, Navy, and Air F ­ orce—​­and the National Security Council (NSC), an advisory group of the government’s top specialists in international relations. The act made permanent the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a wartime innovation bringing together the leaders of all branches of the armed forces. It also established the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to coordinate global i­ ntelligence-​­gathering activities. In 1952, Truman created the National Security Agency (NSA) within the Defense Department. Its charge was to “encrypt” government communications to ensure their privacy and to intercept the communications of other nations. The NSA also provided surveillance of Americans targeted as potential threats.

 a jewish nation: israel

 At the same time that the United States was helping to form new alliances, it was helping to form a new nation. Palestine, the biblical Holy Land, had been a British protectorate since 1919. For hundreds of years, Jews throughout the world had dreamed of returning to their ancestral homeland of Israel and its ancient capital Zion, a part of Jerusalem. Many ­Zionists—​­Jews who wanted a separate Jewish ­nation—​­had migrated there. More arrived during and after the Nazi persecution of European Jews. Hitler’s effort to exterminate the Jews convinced many that their only hope for a secure future was to create their own nation. Late in 1947, the United Nations voted to divide (“partition”) Palestine into separate Jewish and Arab states. The Jews readily agreed, but the Arabs were fiercely opposed. Palestine was their ancestral home, too; Jerusalem was as holy to Muslims as it was to Jews and Christians. Arabs viewed the creation of a Jewish nation in Palestine as an act of war, and they attacked Israel in early 1948. Hundreds were killed before the Haganah (Jewish militia) won control of most of Palestine. When British oversight of Palestine officially expired on May 14, 1948, David ­Ben-​­Gurion, the Jewish leader in Palestine, proclaimed Israel’s independence. President Truman officially recognized the new Israeli nation within minutes, as did the Soviet Union. One million Jews, most of them European immigrants, now had their own nation. Early the next morning, however, the Arab League n ­ ations—​­Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, Jordan, and ­Egypt—​­invaded Israel, beginning a period of nearly constant warfare in the Holy Land. Mediators from the UN gradually worked out a truce agreement, restoring an uneasy peace by May 11, 1949, when Israel

 1228  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 joined the United Nations. Israel was allowed to keep all its conquered territories, including the whole Palestine coast. The Palestinian Arabs lost everything. Most of them became stateless refugees who scattered into neighboring Lebanon, Jordan, and Egypt. ­Stored-​­up resentments and sporadic warfare between Israel and the Arab states have festered ever since, complicating U.S. foreign policy, which has tried to maintain friendships with both sides but has usually tilted toward Israel.

Expanding the New Deal
 For the most part, Republicans and Democrats in Congress cooperated with President Truman on issues related to the cold war, though often grudgingly. Senator Claude Pepper, a liberal Democrat from Florida, insisted that if Franklin Roosevelt were still alive, “we’d be getting on better with Russia.” Republican senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio accused Truman of “appeasing Russia, a policy which has sacrificed throughout Eastern Europe and Asia the freedom of many nations and millions of people.” On domestic issues, however, Truman faced widespread opposition. The c­ ost-​­cutting Republicans in Congress hoped that they could end the New Deal as the war drew to a close.

 from war to peace

 In September 1945, Truman called Congress into a special emergency session at which he presented a ­twenty-​­one-​­point program to guide the nation’s “reconversion” from wartime back to peacetime. Massive government spending during the war had ended the Great Depression and brought about full employment, but Truman’s postwar challenge was to ensure that the peacetime economy absorbed the millions of men and women who had served in the armed forces and were now seeking civilian jobs. During the second half of 1945 and throughout 1946, some 700,000 people in uniform, mostly men, returned to civilian life. By 1947, the armed forces had shrunk from 12 million to 1.5 million. Fears of massive unemployment in ­defense-​­related industries led people to worry about another depression. A New York Times headline predicted: “5,000,000 EXPECTED TO LOSE ARMS JOBS!” Truman called for unemployment insurance to cover more workers, a higher minimum wage, construction of massive ­low-​­cost public housing projects, regional development projects to put military veterans to work, and much more. A powerful Republican congressman named Joseph W. Martin was stunned by the scope of Truman’s proposals. “Not even President Roosevelt,” he gasped, “ever asked for so much at one sitting.”

Expanding the New Deal  1229


 Drugstore in Bronxville, NY America quickly demobilized after the long war effort, turning its attention to the pursuit of abundance.

 Truman’s primary goal was to “prevent prolonged unemployment” while avoiding the “bitter mistakes” that had produced wild price inflation and a recession after the First World War. He also wanted to retain, for a while, the wartime controls on wages, prices, and rents, as well as the rationing of scarce food items. Most of all, he wanted to minimize unemployment as workers in defense plants were laid off and millions of military veterans went looking for civilian jobs. Truman called on Congress to guarantee every American a job. Congress refused to go that far. Instead, it approved the Employment Act of 1946, which authorized Truman and the federal government “to promote maximum employment, production, and purchasing power.” Liberals were disappointed by the new president’s inability to win over legislators. “Alas for Truman,” said the New Republic, there was “no bugle note in his voice” to rally public opinion. “What one misses,” said Max Lerner, an influential journalist, “is the confident sense of direction that Roosevelt gave, despite all the contradictions of his policy.” Throughout 1946, Republicans and conservative southern Democrats in Congress balked at most of Truman’s efforts to revive or expand New Deal

 1230  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 programs. The Great Depression was over, critics stressed. Different times demanded different ­programs—​­or none at all. The end of the war caused s­hort-​­term economic problems but not the postwar depression many had feared. Many women who had been recruited to work in defense industries were shoved out as men took off uniforms and looked for jobs. At a shipyard in California, the foreman gathered the women workers and told them to go welcome the troop ships as they pulled into port. The next day, all of the women were let go to make room for male veterans. Still, several shock absorbers cushioned the economic impact of demobilization. They included federal unemployment insurance (and other Social Security benefits) and the Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944, known as the GI Bill of Rights, under which the federal government spent $13 billion on military veterans for education, vocational training, medical treatment, unemployment insurance, and loans for building houses and starting new businesses.

 wages, prices, and labor unrest

 The most acute economic problem Truman faced was the postwar spike in prices charged for consumer goods. During the war, the government had frozen wages and prices and banned strikes by labor unions. When wartime economic controls were removed, prices for scarce consumer items shot up, spurring labor unions to demand pay increases. When raises were not provided, a record number of postwar strikes erupted in 1945–1946, exacerbating the shortages of consumer goods. Workers at General Motors went on strike for almost four months, making it much more difficult for people to buy a car. Never before or since had so many American workers walked off the job in one year. Labor disputes crippled the crucial coal and railroad industries. Like Theodore Roosevelt before him, Truman grew frustrated with the stubbornness of both management and labor leaders. He took federal control of the coal mines, whereupon the mine owners agreed to union demands. In May 1946, Truman threatened to draft striking railroad workers into the military if they did not go back to work. His threat, probably illegal, did the trick, but it embittered many workers who had long voted Democratic. A leading union official announced that organized labor “is through with Truman.” Truman’s efforts to control rising prices were equally controversial. On June 30, 1946, he lifted wartime controls on consumer prices. Within days, prices for groceries skyrocketed, rising in two weeks as much as they had risen in the previous three years. So Truman restored price controls. Ranchers were so upset by the president’s change of course that they refused to sell their cattle for slaughter. Suddenly, there was a “beefsteak” crisis as consumers complained that the supply of food was worse than it had been during the war.

Expanding the New Deal  1231


 Time magazine’s ­Washington-​­based political reporter alerted his editor that Truman was so unpopular “he could not carry Missouri now.” On October 14, just three weeks before the midterm congressional elections, Truman announced that he was removing price controls on meat. Steaks and hamburger meat soon appeared on grocery shelves, but prices again soared. A Republican political strategist loved the turn of events, telling his colleagues that “the tide is sweepin’ our way.” And it was.

 political cooperation and conflict

 During the congressional election campaigns in 1946, Republicans adopted a simple, ­four-​­word slogan: “Had Enough? Vote Republican!” Using loudspeakers, Republicans drove through city streets saying, “Ladies, if you want meat, vote Republican.” A union leader tagged Truman “the No. 1 Strikebreaker,” while much of the public, upset by the unions, price increases, food shortages, and the scarcity of automobiles and affordable housing, blamed the strikes on the White House. Labor unions had emerged from the war with more power than ever before. Some 14.5 million workers, more than a third of the workforce, were now unionized. Members had tended to vote Democratic, but not in the 1946 elections, which gave the Republicans majorities in both houses of Congress for the first time since 1928. “The New Deal is kaput,” one newspaper editor crowed. The Chicago Tribune claimed that Americans had “won the greatest victory for the Republic since Appomattox.” The president, taunted the United ­ ne-​­termer.” Even many Democrats had soured on Truman, States News, “is a o circulating a slogan that expressed their frustration: “I’m just Mild about Harry.” The new Republican Congress that convened in early 1947 reflected the national discontent. It curbed the power of unions by passing the ­Taft-​ ­Hartley Labor Act of 1947 (officially called the ­Labor-​­Management Relations Act). The law allowed employers to campaign against efforts to form unions and outlawed unions from coercing workers to join or refusing to negotiate grievances. The T ­ aft-​­Hartley Act also required union leaders to take “loyalty oaths” declaring that they were not members of the Communist party, banned strikes by federal employees, and imposed a “­cooling-​­off ” period of eighty days on any strike that the president deemed dangerous to the public welfare. Yet the most troubling element of the new bill was a provision that allowed state legislatures to pass “­right-​­to-​­work” laws that ended the practice of forcing all wage workers at a company to join a union once a majority voted to unionize. In a show of support for organized labor, Truman vetoed the ­Taft-​­Hartley bill, which unions called “the s­ lave-​­labor act.” He denounced the “shocking” bill as “bad for labor, bad for management, and bad for the country.” W ­ orking-​­class

 1232  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 Fight for desegregation Demonstrators led by activist A. Philip Randolph (left) picket the Democratic National Convention on July 12, 1948, calling for racial integration of the armed forces.

 Democrats were delighted. Many unionists who had gone over to the Republicans in 1946 returned to the Democrats because of Truman’s strong support. Journalist James Wechsler reported that “Mr. Truman has reached the crucial fork in the road and turned unmistakably to the left.” Congress, however, overturned the president’s veto, and T ­ aft-​­Hartley became law. The number of strikes dropped sharply thereafter, and representatives of management and labor learned to work together. At the same time, by 1954, fifteen state legislatures, mainly in the South and West, had used the ­Taft-​ H ­ artley Act to pass “­right-​­to-​­work” laws forbidding ­union-​­only workplaces. Those states thereafter recruited industries to relocate because of their low wages and “nonunion” policies.

 civil rights

 Another of Truman’s challenges was the bigotry faced by returning African American soldiers. When one black veteran arrived home in a uniform decorated with combat medals, he was welcomed by a white neighbor who said: “Don’t you forget . . . ​that you’re still a nigger.” The Second World War had changed America’s racial landscape in important ways, however. As a New York Times editorial explained in early 1946, “This is a particularly good time to campaign against the evils of bigotry, prejudice,

Expanding the New Deal  1233


 and race hatred because we have witnessed the defeat of enemies who tried to found a mastery of the world upon such cruel and fallacious policy.” African Americans had fought in large numbers to overthrow the Nazi regime of ­government-​­sponsored racism, and returning veterans were unwilling to put up with racial abuse at home. The cold war also gave political leaders added incentive to improve race relations. The Soviets often compared racism in the United States to the Nazis’ brutalization of the Jews. In the ideological contest against capitalism, Communists highlighted examples of American racism to win influence among the newly emerging nations of Africa. Black veterans who spoke out against racial bigotry often risked their lives. In 1946, two African American couples in rural Georgia were gunned down by a white mob. One of the murderers explained that George Dorsey, one of the victims, was “a good nigger” until he went into the army. “But when he came out, he thought he was as good as any white people.” In the fall of 1946, a delegation of civil rights activists urged President Truman to condemn the Ku Klux Klan and the lynching of African Americans. The delegation graphically described incidents of torture and intimidation against blacks in the South. Truman was horrified: “My God! I had no idea that it was as terrible as that! We’ve got to do something.” Truman thereupon appointed a Committee on Civil Rights to investigate violence against African Americans. A year later, with Truman’s endorsement, the commission issued a report, “To Secure These Rights,” which called for a federal ­anti-​­lynching bill, abolition of the poll tax designed to keep poor blacks from voting, a voting rights act, an end to racial segregation in the armed forces, and a ban on racial segregation in public transportation. Southern Democrats were furious. South Carolina governor J. Strom Thurmond warned Truman that the southern Democratic vote was no longer “in the bag.” Thurmond would soon leave the party to form the Dixiecrats in opposition to Truman. On July 26, 1948, Truman took a bolder step when he banned racial discrimination in the federal government. Four days later, he issued an executive order ending racial segregation in the armed forces. The air force and navy quickly complied, but the army dragged its feet until the early 1950s. By 1960, however, the armed forces were the most racially integrated of all national organizations. Desegregating the military was, Truman claimed, “the greatest thing that ever happened to America.”

 jackie robinson

 Meanwhile, racial segregation was being dismantled in a much more public area: professional baseball. In April 1947, the Brooklyn Dodgers roster included the first African American to play major

 1234  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 Jackie Robinson Robinson’s unfaltering courage and superior athletic skills prompted the integration of sports, drawing African American and Latino spectators to the games. Here, he greets his Dominican fans at Trujillo High School in Santo Domingo.

 league baseball: Jack Roosevelt “Jackie” Robinson. He was born in 1919 in a Georgia sharecropper’s cabin, the grandson of slaves. Six months later, his father left town with a neighbor’s wife, never to return. Robinson’s mother moved the family to Pasadena, California, where Jackie became a marvelous ­all-​­around athlete. At UCLA, he was the first athlete in school history to letter in four sports: baseball, basketball, football, and track. After serving in the army during World War II, he began playing professional baseball in the s­ o-​ ­called Negro Leagues. He did so well that major league scouts reported that he could play in the big leagues. At that point, Branch Rickey, the president and general manager of the Brooklyn Dodgers, interviewed Robinson for three hours on August 28, 1945. Rickey asked Robinson if he could face racial abuse without losing his temper. Robinson was shocked: “Are you looking for a Negro who is afraid to fight back?” Rickey replied that he needed a pathbreaking “Negro player” with “guts enough not to fight back.” Robinson assured him he was the best candidate to integrate baseball: “If you want to take this gamble, I will promise there will be no incident.” He then signed Robinson to a contract for $600 a month. Rickey

Expanding the New Deal  1235


 explained to his critics that he had found a terrific player who was a strong, quiet warrior of incomparable courage capable of looking the other way when provoked. And he was often provoked. Soon after Robinson arrived for preseason practice, many of his white Dodger teammates refused to take the field with him. Manager Leo Durocher would have none of that. As he told the team, “I don’t care if the guy is yellow or black, or if he has stripes . . . ​I’m the manager of this team, and I say he plays.” During the 1947 season, teammates and opposing players viciously baited Robinson. Pitchers hit him, base runners spiked him, and spectators booed him and drenched him in beer, even as he led the Dodgers to the National League championship and eventually six World Series appearances. In Cincinnati, Reds fans posted a sign reading: “Robinson: We are going to kill you if you attempt to enter a ball game as Crosley Field.” Hotels refused him rooms, and restaurants denied him service. Hate mail arrived by the bucketful. One sportswriter called Robinson “the loneliest man I have ever seen in sports.” On the other hand, black spectators were electrified by Robinson’s courageous example and turned out in droves to watch him play. A headline in a Boston newspaper expressed the prevailing sentiment: “Triumph of Whole Race Seen in Jackie’s Debut in Major League Ball.” As time passed, Robinson won over many fans and players with his courage, wit, grit, and talent. As sportswriter Red Smith observed, Robinson was an example of “the unconquerable doing the impossible.” During his first season with the Dodgers, Robinson stole twice as many bases as anyone else in the National League, and he was named Rookie of the Year. Between 1949 and 1954, Robinson had a batting average of .327, among the best in baseball. Yankees catcher Yogi Berra said “he could beat you in a lot of ways.” Robinson’s very presence on the field with ­lily-​­white teams forced spectators sitting in racially divided bleachers to confront the hypocritical reality of segregation. Other teams soon began signing black players. Racial attitudes were ­changing—​­slowly. In 1947, Robinson was voted the second most popular American, behind singer Bing Crosby. “My life,” Robinson remembered, “produced understanding among whites, and it gave black people the idea that if I could do it, they could do it, too, that blackness wasn’t subservient to anything.”

 mexican americans

 In the Far West, Mexican Americans (often grouped with other ­Spanish-​­speaking immigrants as Hispanics or Latinos) continued to experience ethnic prejudice. Schools in Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, and California routinely segregated Mexican American children from whites. The 500,000 Latino veterans were especially frustrated that their efforts in the war were not rewarded with equality at home. They were frequently

 1236  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 denied access to educational, medical, and housing benefits available to white servicemen. Some mortuaries even denied funeral services to Mexican Americans killed in combat. As a funeral director in Texas explained, “the Anglo people would not stand for it.” To fight such prejudicial treatment, Mexican American war veterans led by Dr. Hector Perez Garcia, a U.S. Army major who had served as a combat surgeon, organized the American GI Forum in Texas in 1948. Soon there were branches across the nation. Garcia, born in Mexico in 1914 and raised in Texas, stressed the importance of formal education to Mexican Americans. The organization’s motto read: “Education Is Our Freedom and Freedom Should Be Everybody’s Business.” At a time when Mexican Americans in Texas averaged no more than a ­third-​ ­grade education, Garcia and five of his siblings had completed medical school and become physicians. Yet upon his return from the war, he encountered “discrimination everywhere. We had no opportunities. We had to pay [poll taxes] to vote. We had segregated schools. We were not allowed to go into public places.” Garcia and the GI Forum initially focused on veterans’ issues but soon expanded the organization’s scope to include fostering equal opportunities and equal treatment for all people. The GI Forum lobbied to end poll taxes, sued for the right of Latinos to serve on juries, and developed schools for jobless veterans. In 1984, Garcia received the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the nation’s highest civilian honor.

 shaping the fair deal

 During 1947, after less than three years in the White House, Truman had yet to shake the widespread impression that he was not up to the job. Critics proclaimed that “to err is Truman.” The editors of Time magazine reflected the national sentiment when they wrote, “Mr. Truman has often faced his responsibilities with a cheerful, dogged courage. But his performance was almost invariably awkward, uninspired, and above all, mediocre.” Voters, they added, believed that Truman “means well, but he doesn’t do well.” Most political analysts assumed that the president would lose his effort to win another term. Truman, too, feared that he would lose. In July 1947, he met with General Dwight D. Eisenhower as he was preparing to retire as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Worried that General Douglas MacArthur, a ­self-​­described “­ right-​­ wing Republican,” might be the Republican presidential nominee in 1948, Truman urged Eisenhower to run as the Democratic nominee and even offered to be his v­ ice-​­presidential running mate. Eisenhower declined, explaining that he was going to become president of Columbia University in New York City.

Expanding the New Deal  1237


 With the president’s popularity sinking, the Democratic party was about to split in two. Southern conservatives resented Truman’s outspoken support of civil rights, while the left wing of the party resented the firing of Secretary of Commerce Henry A. Wallace for publicly criticizing the administration’s a­ nti-​ ­Soviet policies. “Getting tough [with the Soviet Union],” Wallace had argued, “never brought anything real and l­asting—​­whether for schoolyard bullies or world powers. The tougher we get, the tougher the Russians will get.” Wallace had said that the United States had “no more business in the political affairs of Eastern Europe than Russia has in the political affairs of Latin America.” The danger of another world war, he said, “is much less from communism than it is from [American] imperialism.” Wallace’s comments so outraged the leaders of the State Department that Truman felt he had no choice but to get rid of him. Despite the gloomy predictions for 1948, Truman mounted an intense reelection campaign. His first step was to shore up the major elements of the New Deal coalition of w ­ orking-​­class voters: farmers, labor unionists, and African Americans. In his 1948 State of the Union message, Truman announced that the programs he would later call his “Fair Deal” (to distinguish them from Roosevelt’s New Deal) would build upon the efforts of the New Deal to help all Americans. The first goal, Truman said, was to ensure civil rights for all Americans. He added proposals to increase federal aid to education, expand unemployment and retirement benefits, create a comprehensive system of national health insurance, enable more rural people to connect to electricity, and increase the minimum wage.

 the election of 1948

 The ­Republican-​­controlled Congress dismissed Truman’s proposals, an action it would later regret. At the Republican convention, New York governor Thomas E. Dewey won the presidential nomination on the third ballot. While the platform endorsed most of the New Deal reforms and approved the administration’s bipartisan foreign policy, Dewey promised to run things more efficiently. In July, glum Democrats gathered for their convention in Philadelphia. Everyone assumed a Republican victory in November. A reporter wrote that they behaved “as though they [had] accepted an invitation to a funeral.” Some party leaders, including Roosevelt’s son James, a California congressman, tried to convince Dwight Eisenhower to accept the Democratic nomination, and many others joined his “dump Truman” effort. The popular war hero declined, however, explaining that his refusal was “final and complete.” Delegates who expected to do little more than go through the motions of nominating Truman were doubly surprised, first by the battle on the conven-

 1238  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 Birth of the Dixiecrats Alabama delegates stand to boo Truman’s call for civil rights before they walked out of the 1948 Democratic National Convention.

 tion floor over civil rights and then by Truman’s endorsement of civil rights for African Americans in his acceptance speech. Liberal Democrats led by Minnesota’s Hubert Humphrey commended Truman “for his courageous stand on the issue of civil rights” and declared that the “time has arrived for the Democratic party to get out of the shadow of civil rights.” White segregationist delegates from Alabama and Mississippi walked out in protest. The solidly Democratic South had fractured over race. On July 17, a group of rebellious southern Democrats met in Birmingham, Alabama. While waving Confederate flags and singing “Dixie,” they nominated South Carolina’s segregationist governor, Strom Thurmond, on a States’ Rights Democratic party ticket, quickly dubbed the “Dixiecrat party.” The Dixiecrats denounced Truman’s “infamous” civil rights initiatives and championed states’ rights against federal efforts to change the tradition of white supremacy in the South. A few days later, on July 23, the left wing of the Democratic party gathered in Philadelphia to form a new Progressive party and nominate for president Henry A. Wallace, Roosevelt’s former secretary of agriculture and vice president, whom Truman had fired as secretary of commerce. One Democratic leader asked Truman to withdraw from the race to help the party’s chances. He replied: “I was not brought up to run from a fight.”

Expanding the New Deal  1239


 The splits in the Democratic ranks seemed to spell the final blow to Truman, but he refused to give in. He was finally renominated long after midnight. By the time he entered the auditorium, it was 2 a.m., but he aroused the faithful by promising that “I will win this election and make the Republicans like it!” He pledged to bring Congress into special session and demand that it confront the housing crisis and boost the minimum wage. Within days, an invigorated Truman set out on a 22,000-mile “­whistle-​ ­stop” train tour, making ten speeches a day scolding the “­do-​­nothing” Eightieth Congress. The p ­ lain-​­talking president attracted huge crowds. The Republicans,

THE ELECTION OF 1948

WA OR

 CA

MT ID

 NV

 ND

WY UT

 AZ

 CO

 MN

 SD

 IA

NE KS OK

NM TX

 NH 4 VT 3 WI

 NY

MI PA

 OH 25 WV VA MO 8 11 KY 11 NC TN 11 AR SC MS AL GA 9 11 LA FL IL

 IN

ME MA 16 RI 4 CT 8 NJ 16 DE 3 MD 8

Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Harry S. Truman (Democrat)




24,200,000


Thomas E. Dewey (Republican)




22,000,000


J.
Strom Thurmond (States’ Rights Democrat) 



1,200,000


Henry A. Wallace (Progressive)




1,160,000


 Why did the political experts predict a Dewey victory? Why was civil rights such a divisive issue at the Democratic convention? ■ How did the candidacies of Strom Thurmond and Henry Wallace end up WWN64 Figurehelping M27_2 Truman? ■ ■

 First proof

 1240  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 “Dewey Defeats Truman” Truman’s victory in 1948 was such a surprise that this early edition of the Chicago Daily Tribune reported that Dewey had won.

 he charged, “have the propaganda and the money, but we have the people, and the people have the votes. That’s why we’re going to win.” Friendly audiences loved his fighting spirit and dogged courage, shouting, “Pour it on, Harry!” and “Give ’em hell, Harry.” Truman responded: “I don’t give ’em hell. I just tell the truth and they think it’s hell.” The polls predicted a sure win for Dewey, but on Election Day Truman pulled off the biggest upset in history, taking 24.2 million votes (49.5 percent) to Dewey’s 22 million (45.1 percent) and winning a thumping margin of 303 to 189 in the electoral college. Democrats also regained control of both houses of Congress. Thurmond and Wallace each received more than 1 million votes, but the revolt of right and left had worked to Truman’s advantage. The Dixiecrat rebellion backfired by angering black voters, who turned out in droves to support Truman, and the Progressive party’s radicalism made it hard for Republicans to tag Truman as soft on communism. Thurmond carried four southern states (South Carolina, Mississippi, Alabama, and Louisiana).

 the fair deal rejected

 Truman viewed his surprising victory as a mandate for expanding the social welfare programs established by Franklin Roosevelt. His State of the Union message in early 1949 repeated the agenda he had set forth the year before. “Every segment of our population and every individual,” he declared, “has a right to expect from our government a fair deal.”

The Cold War Heats Up  1241


 Truman’s Fair Deal promised “greater economic opportunity for the mass of the people.” Most of the Fair Deal proposals that gained congressional approval were ex­­tensions or enlargements of New Deal programs: a higher minimum hourly wage, expansion of Social Security coverage to 10 million workers not included in the original 1935 bill, and a large s­ lum-​­clearance and ­public-​­housing program. Despite enjoying Democratic ma­­­­jorities in Congress, however, Truman ran up against the same alliance of conservative southern Democrats and Republicans who had worked against Roosevelt in the late 1930s. The bipartisan conservative coalition nixed most of Truman’s new programs. Congress rejected several civil rights bills, national health insurance, federal aid to education, and a new approach to subsidizing farmers. It also turned down Truman’s requested repeal of the a­ nti-​­union ­Taft-​­Hartley Act. Yet the Fair Deal was not a complete failure. It laid the foundation for programs that the next generation of reformers would promote.

The Cold War Heats Up
 As during Harry Truman’s first term, global concerns during his second term would again distract him from domestic issues. In his 1949 inaugural address, Truman called for a vigilant ­anti-​­Communist foreign policy resting on three pillars: the United Nations, the Marshall Plan, and NATO. None of them could help resolve the civil war in China, however.

 “losing” china

 One of the thorniest postwar problems, the Chinese civil war, was fast coming to a head. Chinese Nationalists, led by Chiang ­Kai-​­shek, had been fighting Mao Zedong and the Communists since the 1920s. After the Second World War, the Communists won over most of the peasants. By the end of 1949, the Nationalist government was forced to flee to the island of ­ epublicans—​ Formosa, which it renamed Taiwan. Truman’s ­critics—​­mostly R ­asked bitterly, “Who lost China to communism?” What they did not explain was how Truman could have prevented a Communist victory without a massive U.S. military intervention, which would have been risky, unpopular, and expensive. After 1949, the United States continued to recognize the Nationalist government on Taiwan as the official government of China, delaying formal relations with “Red China” (the People’s Republic of China) for thirty years.

 the soviets develop atomic bombs

As the Communists
 were gaining control of China, news that the Soviets had detonated a nuclear weapon in 1949 frightened people around the world and led Truman to speed

 1242  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 up the design of a hydrogen “superbomb,” a weapon far more powerful than the atomic bombs dropped on Japan. That the Soviets now possessed atomic weapons greatly intensified every cold war confrontation. “There is only one thing worse than one nation having an atomic bomb,” said Nobel ­Prize–​­winning physicist Harold C. Urey. “That’s two nations having it.” The fear of nuclear annihilation joined the fear of communism in deepening the Red Scare.

 ­nsc-​­68

In January 1950, President
 Truman grew so concerned about the Soviets possessing atomic weapons that he asked the National Security Council to assess America’s changing role in the cold war world. Four months later, the Council submitted a ­top-​­secret report, Mao Zedong Chairman of the Chinese ­NSC-​­68. The document called for an Communist Party and the founder of the even more robust effort to “contain” People’s Republic of China. the spread of communism. In alarmist tones, ­NSC-​­68 revealed the major assumptions that would guide U.S. foreign policy for the next twenty years: “The issues that face us are momentous, involving the fulfillment or destruction not only of this Republic but of civilization itself.” ­NSC-​­68 endorsed George Kennan’s “containment” strategy. But where he had focused on political and economic counterpressure, the report’s tone was global and militaristic, calling for “a policy of calculated and gradual coercion” against Soviet ­expansionism—​­everywhere. Paul Nitze, Kennan’s successor as director of policy planning for the State Department, was the report’s primary author. He claimed that the Soviets, driven to impose their will “on the rest of the world,” were becoming increasingly “reckless” and would invade Western Europe by 1954, by which time they would have enough nuclear weapons to destroy the United States. By signing ­NSC-​­68, Truman explained that it would mean “doubling or tripling the budget, increasing taxes heavily, and imposing various kinds of economic controls. It meant a great change in our normal peacetime way of doing things.” ­NSC-​­68 became the guidebook for future American policy,

The Cold War Heats Up  1243


 Shelter for sale On display in a 1950s showroom is a basement fallout shelter, complete with a television, library, and exercise bike, intended to help a family survive a nuclear attack.

 especially as the United States became involved in an unexpected war in Korea that ignited into open combat the smoldering animosity between communism and capitalism around the world.

War in Korea
 By the ­mid-​­1950s, tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union in Europe had temporarily eased as a result of the “balance of terror” created by both sides having atomic weapons. In Asia, however, the situation remained turbulent. The Communists had gained control of mainland China and were threatening to destroy the Chinese Nationalists, who had taken refuge on Taiwan. Japan, meanwhile, was experiencing a dramatic recovery from the devastation caused by U.S. bombing raids during the Second World War. Douglas MacArthur showed deft leadership as the consul in charge of U.S.-occupied Japan. He oversaw the disarming of the Japanese military, the drafting of a

 1244  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 democratic constitution, and the nation’s economic recovery, all of which were turning Japan into America’s friend. To the east, however, tensions between North and South Korea threatened to erupt into civil war. The Japanese had occupied the Korean Peninsula since 1910, but after they were defeated and withdrew in 1945, the victorious Allies had faced the difficult task of creating an independent Korean nation.

 a divided korea

 Complicating that effort was the presence of Soviet troops in northern Korea. They had accepted the surrender of Japanese forces above the 38th parallel, which divides the Korean Peninsula, while U.S. forces had overseen the Japanese surrender south of the line. The Soviets quickly organized a Communist government, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (North Korea). The Americans countered by helping to establish a democratic government in the more populous south, the Republic of Korea (South Korea). By the end of 1948, separate regimes had appeared in the two sectors, Soviet and American forces had withdrawn, and some 2 million North Koreans had fled to South Korea.

 war erupts

 On January 12, 1950, Secretary of State Dean Acheson gave a speech to the National Press Club in Washington, D.C., in which he said he was often asked, “Has the State Department got an Asian policy?” He stressed that the United States had assumed “the necessity of . . . ​the military defense of Japan.” He then added that America had created a “defensive perimeter” running along the Aleutian Islands off the coast of Alaska to Japan to the Ryukyu Islands to the Philippines. Where “other areas in the Pacific are concerned,” Acheson added, “it must be clear that no person can guarantee these areas against military attack.” Acheson’s statement came back to haunt him. On June 24, 1950, the secretary of state telephoned President Truman: “Mr. President,” he reported, “I have very serious news. The North Koreans have invaded South Korea.” With the encouragement of the Soviet Union and Communist China, the S­ oviet-​­equipped North Korean People’s Army had rapidly forced the South Korean forces into a headlong retreat. Within three days, Seoul, the South Korean capital, was captured, and only 22,000 of the 100,000 South Korean soldiers were still capable of combat. People then and since have argued that Acheson’s clumsy reference to the “defensive perimeter” in Asia may have convinced the North Koreans and Soviets that the United States would not resist an invasion of South Korea. When reporters asked Truman how he would respond to the invasion, the president declared: “By God, I’m going to let them have it!” He assumed, correctly, that the North Korean attack had been encouraged by the Soviets. “There’s no telling what they’ll do if we don’t put up a fight right now,” Truman predicted. He then made a critical decision: without consulting the Joint

The Cold War Heats Up  1245


 Fight and flight American soldiers and Korean civilian refugees march into the Nakdong River region in the south.

 Chiefs of Staff or the Congress, he decided to wage war through the backing of the United Nations rather than by seeking a declaration of war from Congress. He knew that a congressional debate over a war in Korea would take so long that it may then be too late to stop the Communists. An emergency meeting of the UN Security Council in late June 1950 censured the North Korean “breach of peace.” By sheer coincidence, the Soviet delegate, who held a veto power, was at the time boycotting the council because it would not seat Communist China in place of Nationalist China. On June 27, the Security Council called on UN members to “furnish such assistance to the Republic of Korea as may be necessary to repel the armed attack and to restore international peace and security in the area.” Truman then ordered U.S. air, naval, and ground forces into action and appointed ­seventy-​­year-​­old Douglas MacArthur supreme commander of the UN forces. The attack on South Korea, Truman said, made “it plain beyond all doubt that the international Communist movement is prepared to use armed invasion to conquer independent nations.” Truman’s decisive steps gained strong bipartisan approval, but neither the nation nor the administration were united on the objectives of the war or its conduct.

 1246  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 The Korean conflict was the first military action authorized by the United Nations, and some twenty other nations participated. The United States provided the largest contingent by far, some 330,000 troops. The American defense of South Korea set a worrisome precedent: war by order of a ­president—​­rather than by a vote of Congress, which the U.S. Constitution requires. Truman dodged the issue by officially calling the conflict a “police action” rather than a war. Critics labeled it “Mr. Truman’s War.”

 turning the tables

 The Korean War featured brutal combat in terrible conditions punctuated by heavy casualties and widespread destruction on both sides. For the first three months, the fighting in Korea went badly for the Republic of Korea (ROK) and the UN forces. By September 1950, the decimated South Korean troops were barely hanging on at Pusan, at the southern tip of the Korean Peninsula. Then, in a brilliant maneuver on September 15, General MacArthur staged a surprise amphibious landing behind the North Korean lines at Inch’ŏn, the port city for Seoul, some 150 miles north of Pusan. UN troops drove a wedge through the North Korean army, only a quarter of whom (some 25,000 soldiers) managed to flee across the border. Days later, South Korean troops recaptured Seoul. At that point, the vainglorious MacArthur became overconfident and persuaded Truman to allow U.S. troops to push across the 38th parallel into North Korea. Containment of communism was no longer enough; MacArthur now sought to rid North Korea of the “red menace,” even if this meant expanding the war into China to prevent the Chinese from resupplying their North Korean allies.

 the chinese intervene

 By October 1950, UN forces were about to capture the North Korean capital, P’yŏngyang. President Truman, concerned that MacArthur’s move would provoke Communist China to enter the war, repeatedly asked the U.S. commander to meet with him in Washington, D.C., only to be rebuffed. Finally, the president flew 7,000 miles to Wake Island to meet with MacArthur, who contemptuously refused to salute his commander in chief. At the meeting on October 15, MacArthur dismissed Chinese threats to intervene, even though they had massed troops on the Korean border. That same day, the Communist government in Beijing announced that China “cannot stand idly by” as its North Korean allies were humiliated. On October 20, UN forces entered the North Korean capital, and on October 26, advance units reached Ch’osan on the Yalu River, North Korea’s border with China. MacArthur predicted total victory by Christmas. Instead, he blundered into a catastrophe. On the night of November 25, some 300,000 Chinese “volunteers”

The Cold War Heats Up  1247


THE KOREAN WAR, 1950 AND 1950–1953 CHINA USSR

 r

CHINA MANCHURIA

 USSR

 r ve

Farthest
 UN advance, Nov. 1950

NORTH KOREA

 Ch’osan

. 1
 ov ,N ck ta at

 Ch’osan

NORTH KOREA
North Korean offensive, June – Sept. 1950 
 P’yongyang

SEA OF JAPAN

SEA OF JAPAN

 P’yongyang

 Truce line, July 27, 1953

38°


Seoul


 P’anmunjom Inch’on

 Inch’on

Chorwon
Seoul


SOUTH KOREA UN
position, Sept. 1950 
38°
 UN retreat, Jan. 1951

YELLOW SEA
Mac A Sept. 1 rth u 5, 19 r 
YELLOW SEA

Y al


Ch
 in es e

Y al


 uR

 MANCHURIA

 ive

Vladivostok


1950–1953


 uR i

Vladivostok




 UN forces

SOUTH KOREA

 UN position, Sept. 1950

Pusan


 IT

Pusan






100 Miles


100 Kilometers


T
AI TR S EA JAPAN KOR

 KOR

 EA

 ST

R


A


 JAPAN

 How did the surrender of the Japanese in Korea during 1945 set up the conflict between ­Soviet-​­influenced North Korea and U.S.-influenced South Korea? WWN64 ■ What was General MacArthur’s strategyFigure for winning M27_3bthe Korean conflict? WWN64 FirstMacArthur proof ■ Why did President Truman remove General from command? Figure M27_3a ■

 First proof

 counterattacked, sending U.S. forces into a desperate retreat. “We ran like antelopes,” said an American soldier. At the Chosin Reservoir, the First Marine Division was surrounded by seven Chinese divisions. Their desperate situation was worsened by ­minus-​­40-degree cold nights. When asked how the U.S. retreat was going, Marine general Oliver P. Smith replied: “Retreat, hell! We’re not retreating, we’re just advancing in a different direction.” Smith eventually directed an ingenious breakout by the Marines that saved the division from total destruction. Still, the UN forces were in retreat. By January 15, the Communist Chinese and North Koreans had recaptured Seoul. What had started as a defensive war

 1248  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 against North Korean aggression had become an unlimited war against the North Koreans and China’s People’s Liberation Army.

 macarthur crosses the line

 The Chinese intervention caught MacArthur wholly unprepared. He now asked for ­thirty-​­four atomic bombs and proposed air raids on China, explaining to President Truman and the Joint Chiefs of Staff that “If we lose the war to communism in Asia, the fall of Europe is inevitable.” His plans horrified the military leadership in Washington, D.C. It would be, said General Omar Bradley, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “the wrong war at the wrong place at the wrong time with the wrong enemy.” Truman agreed. In late 1950, the UN forces rallied. By January 1951, they had secured their lines below Seoul and launched a counterattack. When Truman began negotiations with North Korea to restore the prewar boundary, MacArthur undermined the president by issuing an ultimatum for China to make peace or suffer an attack. On April 5, on the floor of Congress, the Republican minority leader read a letter from MacArthur that criticized the president and said that “there is no substitute for victory.” Such open insubordination left Truman only two choices: he could accept MacArthur’s aggressive demands, or fire him.

 sacking a hero

 On April 11, 1951, with civilian control of the military at stake, Truman removed MacArthur and replaced him with General Matthew B. Ridgway, a commander who better understood how to conduct a modern war in pursuit of limited objectives. “I believe that we must try to limit the war to Korea,” Truman explained. “A number of events have made it evident that General MacArthur did not agree with that policy. I have therefore considered it essential to relieve General MacArthur so that there would be no doubt or confusion as to the real purpose and aim of our policy.” Truman’s sacking of MacArthur, the army’s only ­five-​­star general, divided the nation. Dean Acheson, the secretary of state, had warned the president that “if you relieve MacArthur, you will have the biggest fight of your administration.” Time magazine reported that “seldom had a more unpopular man fired a more popular one.” Senator Joseph McCarthy called the president a “son of a bitch” for sacking MacArthur. In his diary, Truman noted the ferocious backlash against him: “Quite an explosion. . . . ​Letters of abuse by the dozens.” ­Sixty-​­six percent of Americans initially opposed Truman’s decision. Douglas MacArthur was a ­larger-​­than-​­life military hero and was greeted by adoring crowds upon his return to the United States. Republicans in Congress protested his removal, but Truman stood firm: “I fired him because he wouldn’t respect the authority of the President. I didn’t fire him because he was a dumb

The Cold War Heats Up  1249


 son of a bitch, although he was, but that’s not against the law for generals. If it was, half to ­three-​­quarters of them would be in jail.” That all of the top military leaders supported Truman’s decision deflated much of the criticism. “Why, hell, if MacArthur had had his way,” the president warned, “he’d have had us in the Third World War and blown up ­two-​­thirds of the world.”

 a ­cease-​­fire

On June 24, 1951,
 the Soviet representative at the United Nations proposed a ­cease-​­fire in Korea along the 38th parallel, the original dividing line between North and South. Secretary of State Acheson accepted the ­cease-​­fire (armistice) with the con- Firing of MacArthur In this 1951 sent of the United Nations. China and cartoon by L. J. Roche, President Harry Truman, Secretary of State North Korea responded favorably. Dean Acheson, and the Pentagon Truce talks started on July 10, 1951, dance in the American public’s at Panmunjŏm, only to drag on for two proverbial frying pan for the removal years while sporadic fighting contin- of General Douglas MacArthur from his post as the supreme commander ued. The chief snags were exchanges of U.N. forces in Korea. of prisoners (many captured North Korean and Chinese soldiers did not want to go home) and South Korea’s insistence on unification of the two rival Koreas. Syngman Rhee, the South Korean leader, explained that “an armistice without national unification [is] a death sentence without protest.” By the time a truce was reached, on July 27, 1953, Truman had retired and Dwight D. Eisenhower was president. No peace treaty was ever signed, and Korea, like Germany, remained divided. The inconclusive war, incredibly mindless in the way it began, often reckless in the way it was managed, and largely fruitless in the way it ended, cost the United States more than 33,000 battle deaths and 103,000 wounded or missing. South Korean casualties were about 2 million, and North Korean and Chinese casualties were an estimated 3 million.

 the impact of the korean war

 To most Americans, the North Korean attack on South Korea provided concrete proof that there was an international Communist conspiracy guided by the Soviet Union to control the world.

 1250  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 Truman’s assumption that Stalin and the Soviets were behind the invasion of South Korea led him to deepen the American commitment to stop communism. “The interests of the United States are global in character,” he explained. “A threat to the peace of the world anywhere is a threat to our security.” Fearful that the Soviets would use the Korean conflict as a diversion to invade Western Europe, he ordered a major expansion of U.S. military forces in ­Europe—​­and around the world. Truman also increased assistance to French troops fighting a Communist independence movement in the French colony of Indochina (which included Vietnam), starting America’s deepening military involvement in Southeast Asia.

Another Red Scare
 The Korean War excited another Red Scare at home, as people grew fearful that Communists were infiltrating American society. Since 1938, the House Committee on ­Un-​­American Activities (HUAC) had kept up a drumbeat of accusations about supposed Communist agents in the federal government. On March 21, 1947, President Truman signed an executive order (also known as the Loyalty Order) requiring federal government workers to undergo a background investigation to ensure they were not Communists or even associated with Communists (or other “subversive” groups). Truman knew that the “loyalty program” violated civil liberties, but he felt he had no choice. He was responding to pressure from FBI director J. Edgar Hoover and Attorney General Tom Clark, both of whom were convinced that there were numerous spies working inside the federal government. Truman was also eager to blunt criticism that he was not doing enough to ensure that Soviet sympathizers were not working in government. Truman thought that the fear about Communist subversives was misplaced. “People are very much wrought up about the communist ‘bugaboo,’ ” he wrote to Pennsylvania governor George Earle, “but I am of the opinion that the country is perfectly safe so far as Communism is concerned.” By early 1951, the federal Civil Service Commission had cleared more than 3 million people, while only 378 had been dismissed for doubtful loyalty. Others, however, had resigned for fear they would be dismissed. In 1953, President Dwight D. Eisenhower revoked the Loyalty Order.

 the hollywood ten

 Charges that Hollywood was a “hotbed of communism” led the House Committee on ­Un-​­American Activities to launch a ­full-​­blown investigation of the ­motion-​­picture industry. The HUAC subpoenaed dozens of actors, producers, and directors to testify at its hearings, held in Los Angeles in October 1947. Ten witnesses refused to testify, arguing that

Another Red Scare  1251


 The Red Scare and Hollywood Several courageous movie stars attended the HUAC hearings to support their friends and colleagues who were accused of being Communists. Left to right: Danny Kaye, June Havoc, Humphrey Bogart, and Lauren Bacall (seated).

 the questioning violated their First Amendment rights. When asked if he were a member of the Communist party, screenwriter Ring Lardner Jr. replied: “I could answer, but I would hate myself in the morning.” Another member of the ­so-​­called Hollywood Ten, screenwriter Dalton Trumbo, shouted as he left the hearings, “This is the beginning of an American concentration camp.” All ten were cited for contempt, given prison terms, and blacklisted (banned) from the film industry. The witch hunt launched by the HUAC inspired playwright Arthur Miller, who himself was blacklisted, to write The Crucible, an ­award-​­winning play produced in 1953. It is a dramatic account of the notorious witch trials in Salem, Massachusetts, at the end of the seventeenth century, intended to alert audiences about the dangers of the ­anti-​­Communist hysteria.

 alger hiss

 The spy case most damaging to the Truman administration involved Alger Hiss, president of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, who had served in several government agencies. Whittaker Chambers, a former Soviet spy and later an editor of Time magazine who reversed himself and became an informer testifying against supposed Communists in the

 1252  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 g­ overnment, told the HUAC in 1948 that Hiss had given him secret documents ten years earlier, when Chambers was spying for the Soviets and Hiss was working in the State Department. Hiss sued for libel, and Chambers produced microfilms of the State Department documents that he said Hiss had passed to him. Although Hiss denied the accusation, he was indicted and, after one mistrial, convicted in 1950. The charge was perjury, but he was convicted of lying about espionage, for which he could not be tried because the statute of limitations on the crime had expired. More cases of Communist infiltration surfaced. In 1949, eleven top leaders of the Communist party of the United States were convicted under the Smith Act of 1940, which outlawed any conspiracy to advocate the overthrow of the government. The Supreme Court upheld the law under the doctrine of a “clear and present danger,” which overrode the right to free speech.

 atomic spying

 In 1950, the FBI unearthed a spy network involving both American and British Communists who had secretly passed information about the development of the atomic bomb to the Soviet Union. The disclosure led to the arrest of Klaus Fuchs, a G ­ erman-​­born English nuclear physicist who had worked in the United States during the war and helped to develop the atomic bomb. As it turned out, a New York couple, former Communists Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, were part of the same Soviet spy ring. Their claims of innocence were undercut by the confession of Ethel’s brother, who admitted he was a spy along with his sister and ­brother-​­in-​­law. The convictions of Fuchs and the Rosenbergs fueled Republican charges that Truman’s administration was not doing enough to hunt down Communist agents. The Rosenberg case, called the crime of the century by J. Edgar Hoover, also heightened fears that a vast Soviet network of spies and sympathizers was operating in the United ­States—​­and had “given” Stalin the secret of building atomic weapons. Irving Kaufman, the federal judge who sentenced the Rosenbergs to death, explained that “plain, deliberate murder is dwarfed . . . ​by comparison with the crime you have committed.” They were the first Americans executed for spying.

 mccarthy’s witch hunt

 Evidence of Soviet spying encouraged some to exploit fears of the Communist menace. Early in 1950, a ­little-​­known Republican senator, Joseph R. McCarthy of Wisconsin, surfaced as the most ruthless manipulator of ­anti-​­Communist anxieties. McCarthy, eager to attract media attention through his “­bare-​­knuckle” tactics, took up the cause of a­ nti-​­communism with a fiery speech to a women’s Republican club in Wheeling, West Virginia, on February 9, 1950, in which he

Another Red Scare  1253


 charged that the State Department was infested with Communists. He claimed to have their names, although he never provided them. McCarthy’s stunt got him what he wanted most: publicity. As the New York Times said, “It is difficult, if not impossible, to ignore charges made by Senator McCarthy just because they are usually proved exaggerated or false.” During the next four years, McCarthy made more wild accusations, initially against many Democrats, whom he smeared as “dupes” or “fellow travelers” of the “Commies,” then against officers in the U.S. Army. Truman privately denounced McCarthy as “just a ballyhoo artist who has to cover up his shortcomings with wild charges,” but McCarthy was not so easily dismissed. He enjoyed the backing of fellow Republicans eager to hurt Democrats in the 1950 congressional elections by claiming they were not being tough enough in fighting communism. Senator Lyndon B. Johnson of Texas said McCarthy was “the sorriest senator” in Washington. “But he’s riding high now, he’s got people scared to death. . . .” By the summer of 1951, however, McCarthyism had gotten out of control. McCarthy’s feverish excesses were revealed for all to see when he outrageously accused George Marshall, the former secretary of state and war hero, of making “common cause with Stalin” by “being an instrument of the Communist conspiracy.” Concerns about truth or fair play did not faze McCarthy; his focus was on creating a reign of terror through groundless accusations. Truman called him a “pathological character assassin.” However sincere McCarthy’s desire was to purify America of Communist sympathizers, his unholy war never un­­covered a single Communist agent. But his relentless smear campaign, which tarnished many lives and reputations and had a chilling effect on free speech, went largely unchallenged until the end of the Korean War. During the Red Scare, thousands of l­eft-​­wing Americans were “blacklisted” from employment be­­cause of past political associations, real or rumored. Movies with titles like “I Married a Commu- Joseph R. McCarthy The crusading nist” fed the hysteria, and magazine senator who was determined to identify any Communists serving in the federal stories warned of “a Red under every government. bed.”

 1254  CHAPTER 27  The Cold War and the Fair Deal 1945–1952

 the mccarran act

 Fears of Soviet spies working with American sympathizers led Congress in 1950 to pass the McCarran Internal Security Act over President Truman’s veto, making it unlawful “to combine, conspire, or agree with any other person to perform any act which would substantially contribute to . . . ​the establishment of a totalitarian dictatorship.” Communist organizations had to register with the attorney general. ­Would-​­be immigrants who had belonged to totalitarian parties in their home countries were barred from entering the United States. And during any future national emergencies, American Communists were to be herded into concentration camps. The McCarran Internal Security Act, Truman said in his veto message, would “put the government into the business of thought control.”

 the red scare and the cold war

 Playing upon the fears of the American public did not make for good policy in 1919, nor did it work well in the early fifties. Both Red Scares ended up violating the civil liberties of innocent people. President Truman may have erred in 1947 by creating a government loyalty program that aggravated the ­anti-​­Communist hysteria. Truman’s own attorney general, Tom Clark, contended that there were “so many Communists in America” that they “were ­everywhere—​­in factories, offices, butcher shops, on street corners, in private ­businesses—​­and each carries with him the germs of death for society.” Truman also overstretched American resources when he pledged to “contain” communism everywhere. Containment itself proved hard to contain amid the ideological posturing of Soviet and American leaders. Its chief theorist, George F. Kennan, later confessed that he was partly to blame because he had failed at the outset to clarify the limits of the containment policy and to stress that the United States needed to prioritize its responses to Soviet adventurism.

 a cold war government

 The years after the Second World War were unlike any other postwar period in American history. Having taken on global burdens, the United States became committed to a permanently large national military establishment, along with shadowy new government agencies such as the National Security Council (NSC), the National Security Agency (NSA), and the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). The federal ­government—​­and the ­presidency—​­grew larger, more powerful, and more secretive, fueled by the actions of both major political parties as well as by the intense lobbying efforts of what Dwight D. Eisenhower would later call the ­military-​­industrial complex.

Another Red Scare  1255


 Fears of communism and concerns about a Soviet spy network in the United States mushroomed into politically motivated paranoia. ­Long-​­standing prejudices against Jews fed the hysteria; indeed, many Communist sympathizers were Jews from Eastern Europe. The Red Scare also provided a powerful tool for Republicans to claim that Democrats were “soft on Communism.” One of the worst effects of the Red Scare was to encourage widespread conformity of thought and behavior. By 1950, it had become dangerous to criticize anything associated with the American way of life.

 assessing harry truman

On March 30, 1952, Harry Truman
 announced that he would not seek another presidential term, in part because it was unlikely he could win. Less than 25 percent of voters surveyed said that he was doing a good job, the lowest presidential approval rating in history. Although Americans applauded Truman’s integrity and courage, the unrelenting war against communism, at home and abroad, led people to question his strategy. Negotiations to end the war in Korea had bogged down, the “­red-​ ­baiting” of McCarthyism was expanding, and conservative southern Democrats, members of Truman’s own party, had defeated most of his Fair Deal proposals. The war had also brought higher taxes and higher prices for American consumers, many of whom blamed the president. Only years later would people (and historians) fully appreciate how effectively Truman had dealt with so many complex problems. To the end of his presidency, Truman, a plainspoken man who made decisions based on his “­gut-​­feeling” about what was “right,” viewed himself as an ordinary person who had been given opportunities to do extraordinary things. “I have tried my best to give the nation everything I have in me,” Truman told reporters at one of his last press conferences. “There are a great many people . . . ​ who could have done the job better than I did it. But I had the job and had to do it.” And it was not a simple job, by any means. At the end of one difficult day in the White House, Truman growled while sipping a bourbon and water: “They [his critics] talk about the power of the President, how I can just push a button to get things done. Why, I spend most of my time kissing somebody’s ass.” By the time Truman left the White House in early 1953, the cold war had become an accepted part of the American way of life. But fears about the spread of communism were counterbalanced by the joys of unexpected prosperity. Toward the end of Truman’s presidency, the economy began to grow at what would become the fastest rate in history, transforming social and cultural life and becoming the marvel of the world. The booming economy brought with it the “nifty” fifties.

CHAPTER REVIEW
Summary • 
 The Cold War The cold war was an ideological contest between the Western democracies (especially the United States) and the Communist countries. At the end of the Second World War, the Soviet Union established “friendly” governments in the Eastern European countries it occupied behind an iron curtain of totalitarian control and secrecy.

•


 Containment President Truman responded to the Soviet occupation of Eastern Europe with the policy of containment, the aim of which was to halt the spread of communism by opposing it wherever it emerged. With the Truman Doctrine (1947), he proposed giving economic and military aid to countries facing ­Communist insurgencies, such as Greece and Turkey; he also convinced Congress to approve the National Security Act, which reorganized the U.S. armed forces and created the Central Intelligence Agency. With the Marshall Plan, Truman offered redevelopment aid to all European nations. In 1948, the Berlin airlift overcame a Soviet blockade of supplies to West Berlin. In 1949, the United States became a founding member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), a military alliance of Western democracies united primarily against the Soviet Union.

•


 Truman’s Fair Deal Truman’s Fair Deal was proposed to expand the New Deal despite intense Republican opposition in Congress. Truman could not stop the ­Taft-​­Hartley Act, a ­Republican-​­backed measure to curb the power of labor unions. Truman was more successful in expanding Social Security and, through executive orders, desegregating the military and banning racial discrimination in the hiring of federal employees. After winning a second term in 1948, he proposed a civil rights bill, national health insurance, federal aid to education, and new farm subsidies. Despite the Democrats’ majority in Congress, however, conservative Republicans and southern Democrats (Dixiecrats) joined forces to defeat these initiatives.

•


 The Korean War Containment policies proved less effective in East Asia, as Communists won a long civil war in China in 1949 and ignited a war in Korea. In response, Truman authorized ­NSC-​­68, a comprehensive blueprint for American foreign and defense policies that called for a dramatic increase in military spending and nuclear arms. When North Korean troops invaded South Korea in June 1950, Truman quickly decided to go to war under the auspices of the United Nations. After a year of major gains and reverses by both sides and then two years of stalemate, a truce, concluded in July 1953, ­established a demilitarized zone in Korea.

•


 The Red Scare The onset of the cold war inflamed another Red Scare. Investigations by the House Committee on U ­ n-​­American ­Activities (HUAC) sought to find “subversives” within the federal government. Starting in 1950, Senator Joseph R. McCarthy exploited fears of Soviet spies ­infiltrating the highest levels of the U.S. government.



Another Red Scare  1257


 McCarthyism flourished in the short term because the threat of a world dominated by Communist g­ overnments seemed all too real to many Americans.

Chronology
November 1946
February 1946
March 1947
May 1947
June 1947
July 1947
May 1948
July 1948
October 1948
November 1948
April 1949
October 1949
February 1950
June 1950


 Republicans win control of both houses of Congress George Kennan urges a containment policy toward the Soviet Union The Truman Doctrine promises financial and military assistance to countries resisting Communist takeover The Marshall plan provides massive financial assistance to European nations Congress passes the ­Taft-​­Hartley Labor Act over Truman’s veto National Security Council (NSC) is established Israel is proclaimed an independent nation Truman’s executive order ends segregation in the U.S. armed forces United States and Great Britain airlift supplies to West Berlin Truman defeats Dewey in the presidential election North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) is created China “falls” to communism Senator Joseph McCarthy begins his crusade against suspected Communists in the federal government United States and other UN members go to war in Korea

Key Terms


 iron curtain p. 1218

­Taft-​­Hartley Labor Act (1947) p. 1231


 containment p. 1220

Fair Deal (1949) p. 1237


Truman Doctrine (1947) p. 1221


Dixiecrats p. 1238


Marshall Plan (1948) p. 1222


 ­NSC-​­68 (1950) p. 1242

 Berlin airlift (1948) p. 1225

House Committee on ­Un-​­American
 Activities (HUAC) p. 1250

North Atlantic Treaty Organization
 (NATO) p. 1226

 McCarthyism p. 1253

National Security Act p. 1227


IJK
Go to InQuizitive to see what you’ve learned—and learn what you’ve missed—with personalized feedback along the way. 




Cold War
America
1950–1959


 The Art of Consumerism The United States experienced tremendous prosperity after the Second World War, giving many Americans the unprecedented opportunity to engage in carefree consumption during the 1950­s —​­and personal indebtedness. The Pop Art movement reflected the era’s materialism. Its artists made use of m ­ ass-​ ­produced and advertised products to celebrate American consumer culture. One such artist was Tom Wesselmann, whose 1962 collage Untitled (­Still-​­Life No. 20) is shown above.

I


 n the summer of 1959, two young newlyweds spent their honeymoon in an underground bomb shelter in the backyard of their home. Life magazine showed them in their t­ wenty-​­ton, steel and concrete bunker stocked with enough food and water to survive an atomic attack. The image of newlyweds seeking sheltered security in a new age of nuclear terror symbolized how America in the 1950s was awash in contrasting emotions. The deepening cold war with the Soviet Union cast a frightening shadow over the nation’s traditionally sunny optimism. In 1959, two out of three Americans listed the possibility of atomic war as the nation’s most urgent threat. Still, Americans emerged from the Second World War proud of their military strength, international stature, and industrial might. It was a time rich with possibilities. As the editors of Fortune magazine proclaimed in 1946, “This is a dream era. . . . ​The Great American Boom is on.” So it was, at least for white, m ­ iddle-​­class Americans. During the late 1940s and throughout the 1950s, the United States enjoyed unprecedented economic growth, and most Americans were content. Divorce and homicide rates fell, and people lived longer, on average, thanks in part to medical breakthroughs, including new antibiotics and the vaccine invented by Dr. Jonas Salk that ended the menace of polio. The “happy days” image of America in the fifties as an innocent, prosperous nation awash in good times and enlivened by teenage energies has a kernel of truth. But life was actually much more complicated, even contradictory and hypocritical at times, as many Americans worried about what seemed an uncontrollable future.

 focus questions 1. What were President Eisenhower’s political philosophy and priorities? 2. What factors contributed to postwar prosperity? To what extent did all Americans benefit from it?

 3. What were the criticisms of postwar American society and culture? What were the various forms of dissent and anxiety?

 4. What were the goals and strategies of the civil rights movement that emerged in the 1950s? What was its impact?

 5. What were President Eisenhower’s priorities in conducting the nation’s foreign policy? What was his influence on global affairs?



