 466  CHAPTER 11  The South, Slavery, and King Cotton 1800–1860

 across the Mississippi River. A group of slaves in Virginia recognized the essential role they played in the surging national economy when they asked, “Didn’t we clear the land, and raise the crops of corn, of tobacco, rice, of sugar, of everything? And then didn’t the large cities in the North grow up on the cotton and the sugars and the rice that we made?”

The Distinctiveness of the Old South
 People have long debated what set the Old South apart from the rest of the nation. Most arguments focus on the region’s climate and geography in shaping its culture and economy. The South’s warm, humid climate was ideal for cultivating profitable crops such as tobacco, cotton, rice, indigo, and sugarcane, which led to the plantation system of large commercial agriculture and its dependence upon enslaved labor. Unlike the North, the South had few large cities, few banks, few railroads, few factories, and few schools. Most southern commerce was related to the storage, distribution, and sale of agricultural products, especially cotton. With the cotton economy booming, investors focused on buying land and slaves; there was little reason to create a robust industrial sector. “We want no manufactures; we desire no trading, no mechanical, or manufacturing classes,” an Alabama politician told an English visitor. Profitable farming thus remained the South’s ideal pursuit of happiness. Education was valued by the planter elite for their own sons, but there was little interest in public schooling for the masses. The illiteracy rate in the South was three times higher than in the North.

 a biracial culture

 What made the Old South most distinctive was not its climate or soil but its expanding system of r­ace-​­based slavery. The majority of southern whites did not own slaves, but they supported what John C. Calhoun called the South’s “peculiar institution” because slavery was so central to their society’s way of life. Calhoun’s carefully crafted phrase allowed southerners to avoid using the charged word slavery, while the adjective peculiar implied that slavery was unique to the South, as it essentially was. The profitability and convenience of owning slaves created a sense of social unity among whites that bridged class differences. Poor whites who owned no slaves and resented the planters (“cotton snobs”) could still claim racial superiority over enslaved blacks (“niggers”). Because of r­ ace-​­based slavery, explained Georgia attorney Thomas Reade Cobb, every white “feels that he belongs to an elevated class. It matters not that he is no slaveholder; he is not of the inferior race; he is a ­free-​­born citizen.”

The Distinctiveness of the Old South  467


 The Old South also differed from other sections of the country in its high proportion of ­native-​­born Americans. The region attracted few European immigrants after the Revolution, in part because of geography. The main shipping routes from Britain and Europe took immigrants to northern port cities. Because most immigrants were penniless, they could not afford to travel to the South. Moreover, European immigrants, most of whom were manual laborers, could not compete with slave labor.

 conflicting myths

 Southerners, a North Carolina editor wrote, are “a mythological people, created half out of dream and half out of slander, who live in a still legendary land.” Myths are beliefs made up partly of truths and partly of lies, formed with accurate generalizations and willful distortions. During the nineteenth century, a powerful myth emerged among white ­southerners—​­that the South was both different from and better than the North. This blended notion of distinctiveness and superiority became central to the ­self-​­image of many southerners. Even today, many southerners tenaciously cultivate a defiant pride and separate identity from the rest of the nation. In defending the South and slavery from northern critics, southerners claimed that their region was morally superior. Kind planters, according to the prevailing myth, provided happy slaves with food, clothing, shelter, and ­security—​­in contrast to a North populated with greedy bankers and heartless factory owners who treated their wage laborers worse than slaves. John C. Calhoun insisted that in the northern states the quality of life for free people of color had “become worse” since slavery there had been banned, whereas in the South the standard of living among enslaved African Americans had “improved greatly in every respect.” In this mythic version of the Old South, slavery was defended as being beneficial to both slaves and owners. In Aunt Phillis’s Cabin; or, Southern Life As It Is (1852), novelist Mary Henderson Eastman stressed “the necessity of the existence of slavery at present in our Southern States,” and claimed “that, as a general thing, the slaves are comfortable and contented, and their owners humane and kind.” The agrarian ideal and the southern passion for guns, horsemanship, hunting, and the military filled in the ­self-​­gratifying image of the Old South as a region of honest small farmers and aristocratic gentlemen, young belles and beautiful ladies who led leisurely lives of ­well-​­mannered graciousness, honor, and courage, all the while sipping mint juleps in a carefree romantic world of w ­ hite-​­columned mansions. The contrasting myth of the Old South was much darker. Northern abolitionists (those who wanted an immediate end to slavery) pictured the region

 468  CHAPTER 11  The South, Slavery, and King Cotton 1800–1860

 as being built on an immoral economic system dependent on the exploitation of blacks and the displacement of Native Americans. In this version of the southern myth, the white planters were rarely “natural aristocrats,” like Thomas Jefferson, who were ambivalent about slavery. More often, the planters were viewed as ambitious, s­ elf-​­made men who had seized opportunities to become rich by planting and selling ­cotton—​­and trading in slaves. Northern abolitionists such as Harriet Beecher Stowe portrayed southern planters as cunning capitalists who raped enslaved women, brutalized slaves, and lorded over their communities with arrogant disdain. They treated slaves like cattle, broke up their families, and sold slaves “down the river” to toil in the Louisiana sugar mills and on rice plantations. An English woman traveling in the South in 1830 noted that what slaves in Virginia and Maryland feared most was being “sent to the south and sold. . . . The sugar plantations [in Louisiana] and, more than all, the rice grounds of Georgia and the Carolinas, are the terror of the American negroes.”

 many souths

 The contradictory elements of these conflicting myths continue to fight for supremacy in the South, each pressing its claim to legitimacy, in part because the extreme descriptions are both built upon ­half-​ ­truths and fierce prejudices. The South has long been defined by two souls, two hearts, two minds competing for dominance. The paradoxes associated with this southern mythmaking provided much of the region’s variety, for the Old South, like the New South, was not a single culture but a diverse section with multiple interests and ­perspectives—​­and it was rapidly growing and changing. The Old South included three distinct subsections with different patterns of economic development and diverging degrees of commitment to slavery. Throughout the first half of the nineteenth century, the seven states of the Lower South (South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and parts of Texas) grew increasingly dependent upon commercial cotton production supported by slave labor. A traveler in Mississippi observed in 1835 that ambitious whites wanted “to sell cotton in order to buy n ­ egroes—​­to make more cotton to buy negroes.” By 1860, slaves represented nearly half the population of the Lower South, largely because they were the most efficient producers of cotton in the world. The states of the Upper South (Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Arkansas) had m ­ ore-​­varied agricultural e­ conomies—​­a mixture of large commercial plantations and small family farms (or “yeoman farms”), where crops were grown mostly for household use. Many southern states also had large areas without slavery, especially in the mountains of Virginia, the western Car-

The Cotton Kingdom  469


 Atop the Cotton Kingdom This photograph offers a glimpse of the staggering scale of cotton production. These 500-pound cotton bales are so densely packed and plentiful that men are walking upon them at this Galveston, Texas, port.

 olinas, eastern Tennessee, and northern Georgia, where the soil and climate were not suited to cotton or tobacco. In the Border South (Delaware, Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri), slavery was slowly disappearing because cotton could not thrive there. By 1860, approximately 90 percent of Delaware’s black population and half of Maryland’s were already free. Slave owners in the Lower South, however, had a much larger investment in slavery. They believed that only constant supervision, intimidation, and punishment would keep the f­ast-​­growing population of enslaved workers under control, in part because the working and living conditions for the enslaved were so brutal. “I’d rather be dead,” said a white overseer in Louisiana, “than a nigger in one of those big [sugarcane] plantations.”

The Cotton Kingdom
After the Revolution, as the w
 ­ orn-​­out tobacco fields in Virginia and Maryland lost their fertility, tobacco farming spread into Kentucky and as far west as Missouri. Rice continued to be grown in the coastal areas (“low country”) of

 470  CHAPTER 11  The South, Slavery, and King Cotton 1800–1860

 the Carolinas and Georgia, where fields could easily be flooded and drained by tidal rivers flowing into the ocean. Sugarcane, like rice, was also an expensive crop to produce, requiring machinery to grind the cane to release the sugar syrup. During the early nineteenth century, only southern Louisiana focused on sugar production. In addition to such “cash crops,” the South led the nation in the production of livestock: hogs, horses, mules, and cattle. Southerners, both black and white, fed themselves largely on pork. It was the “king of the table.” John S. Wilson, a Georgia doctor, called the region the “Republic of Porkdom.” Southerners ate pork or bacon “morning, noon, and night.” Corn was on southern plates as often as pork. During the early summer, corn was boiled on the cob; by late summer and fall it was ground into cornmeal, a coarse flour. Cornbread and hominy, as well as a “mush” or porridge made of ­whole-​­grain corn mixed with milk, were almost daily fare.

 king cotton

 During the first half of the nineteenth century, cotton surpassed rice as the most profitable cash crop in the South. Southern cotton (called “white gold”) drove much of the national economy and the Industrial Revolution, feeding the mechanized textile mills in New England and Great Britain. In fact, cotton became one of the transforming forces in n ­ ineteenth-​­century history. It shaped the lives of the enslaved who cultivated it, the planters who grew rich by it, the mill girls who sewed it, the merchants who sold it, the people who wore it, and the politicians who warred over it. “Cotton is King,” exclaimed the Southern Cultivator in 1859, “and wields an astonishing influence over the world’s commerce.” In 1832, over eighty of America’s largest companies were New England textile mills converting cotton into thread and cloth. The Cotton Kingdom resulted largely from two crucial developments. Until the late eighteenth century, cotton fabric was a rarity produced by women in India using hand looms. Then British inventors developed machinery to convert raw cotton into thread and cloth in textile mills. The mechanical production of cotton made Great Britain the world’s first industrial nation, and the number of British textile mills, centered in Lancashire, grew so fast that owners could not get enough cotton fiber to meet their needs. American Eli Whitney solved the problem by constructing the first cotton gin, which mechanized the l­ abor-​­intensive process of manually removing the sticky seeds from the bolls of what was called ­short-​­staple cotton. Taken together, these two breakthroughs helped create the world’s largest ­industry—​­and transformed the South in the process. By 1815, just months after Andrew Jackson’s victory over British troops at New Orleans, some thirty

The Cotton Kingdom  471


 British ships were docked at the city’s wharves because, as an American merchant reported, “Europe must, and will have, cotton for her manufacturers.” During that year alone, more than 65,000 bales of cotton were shipped down the Mississippi River to New Orleans. To be sure, other nations joined the global c­ otton-​­producing ­revolution—​­India, Egypt, Brazil, and ­China—​­but the American South was the driving force of cotton capitalism.

 the old southwest Because of its warm climate and plentiful rainfall, the Lower South became the global leader in cotton production. The region’s cheap, fertile land and the profits to be made in growing cotton generated a frenzied mobility in which people constantly searched for more opportunities and even better land. Henry Watson, a New Englander who moved to Alabama, complained in 1836 that “nobody seems to consider himself settled [here]; they remain one, two, three or four years & must move on to some other spot.” The cotton belt moved south and west during the first half of the nineteenth century, and hundreds of thousands of l­and-​­hungry southerners moved with it. As the oldest southern ­states—​­Virginia and the ­Carolinas—​­experienced soil exhaustion from the overplanting of tobacco and cotton, restless farmers and many sons of planters moved westward to the Old ­Southwest—​­western Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, Arkansas, and eventually, Texas. In 1820, the coastal states of Virginia, the Carolinas, and Georgia had produced two thirds of the nation’s cotton. By 1830, the Old Southwest states were producing two thirds of America’s cotton. An acre of land in South Carolina produced about 300 pounds of cotton, while one acre in Alabama or in the Mississippi Delta, a 200-­mile-​­wide strip of fertile soil between the Yazoo and Mississippi Rivers, could generate 800 pounds. It was the most profitable farmland in the world. Such profits, however, required backbreaking labor, most of it performed by enslaved blacks. A white Virginian noted in 1807 that “there is a great aversion amongst our Negroes to be carried to distant parts, and particularly to our new countries [in the Old Southwest].” In marshy areas near the Gulf coast, slaves were put to work removing trees and stumps from the swampy muck. “None but men as hard as a Savage,” said one worker, could survive such wearying conditions. The formula for growing rich in the Lower South was simple: cheap land, cotton seed, and slaves. A North Carolinian reported that the “Alabama Fever . . . has carried off vast numbers of our citizens.” Between 1810 and 1840, the combined population of Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi increased from about 300,000 (252,000 of whom were in Georgia) to 1,657,799. Annual

 472  CHAPTER 11  The South, Slavery, and King Cotton 1800–1860

 cotton production in the United States had grown from less than 150,000 bales (a bundle of cotton weighing 500 pounds) in 1814 to 4 million bales in 1860.

 the southern frontier

 Farm families in the Old Southwest tended to be large. “There is not a cabin but has ten or twelve children in it,” reported a traveling minister. “When the boys are eighteen and the girls are fourteen, they ­marry—​­so that in many cabins you will see . . . the mother looking as young as the daughter.” Women were a minority among migrants from Virginia and the Carolinas to the Old Southwest. Many resisted moving to what they had heard was a COTTON PRODUCTION, 1821 M

 is s

 MISSOURI

O hi


 o

 ve Ri

 r

 sa

 TN

River


 n

 ee

Ri


 ve

 r

 GA

Columbia


 SC

AL MS

TEXAS (SPANISH)

 NC

 i

 n Te

 s es

 pp

 ssi

ARKANSAS TERRITORY

Riv


 er

 r

 ssi

 ve

 rland R i v e r be

Mi


 s

Ri


Richmond


 VA

 KY

C um


Arkan


Red


 OH

 IN

 IL

 o u ri R iver

Augusta
Macon


 LA

Charleston


Savannah


 ATLANTIC

Mobile


 OCEAN

Baton Rouge
New Orleans


FLORIDA TERRITORY

GU L F O F ME X I C O





200 Miles


200 Kilometers


 Each dot represents 1,000 bales of cotton.

 ■ Why was cotton such a profitable crop? WWN64 ■ What regions produced the most cotton in 1821? Figure M11_1 First ■ proof What innovations enabled farmers to move inland and produce cotton more 29p6 x 25p3 efficiently?

The Cotton Kingdom  473


 ­ isease-​­ridden, ­male-​­dominated, violent, and primitive territory. As a Carod lina woman prepared to depart for Alabama, she confided to a friend that “you cannot imagine the state of despair that I am in.” Another said that “my heart bleeds within me” at the thought of the “many tender cords [of kinship] that are now severed forever.” Others feared that life on the southern frontier would produce a “dissipation” of morals. They heard wild stories of lawlessness, drunkenness, gambling, and whoring. A woman newly arrived in frontier Alabama wrote home that the farmers around her “live in a miserable manner. They think only of making money, and their houses are hardly fit to live in.”

POPULATION GROWTH AND COTTON PRODUCTION, 1821–1859
uri River 
 IN

IL O

 iR

R
 hio

 ive

 OH

 r

 r

 an

 sa R

Red


C um


Ark


 s

 INDIAN iver TERRITORY

 AR

 VA

 KY

 i ve

 MO

 ss pp

KANSAS TERRITORY

Mi


 sso

 is s i

Mi


 land R i v e ber

 TN

Memphis


Te


 nn

 e

Richmond


 r

 e ss

 eR

 ive

 r

 NC

 GA

River


Columbia


 AL

 SC

Charleston
Savannah


 TX

 ATLANTIC

MS
Mobile 
 LA

 OCEAN

New Orleans


 FL

G U LF OF MEXICO
Each dot represents 1,000 bales of cotton. Percentage increase in population, 1821–1859 Under 200% 500%–1,000% 200%–499% Over 1,000% 




200 Miles


200 Kilometers


 ■ What was the relationship between westward migration and the spread of cotton WWN64 Figureplantations? M11_2 ■ proof Why did cotton plantations cluster in certain regions of the South? First 29p6 x 23p0were the environmental and economic consequences of the South’s ■ What

 emphasis on cotton?

 474  CHAPTER 11  The South, Slavery, and King Cotton 1800–1860

 Enslaved blacks had many of the same reservations about relocating. Almost a million captive African Americans in Maryland, Virginia, and the Carolinas were forced to move to the Old Southwest during the first half of the nineteenth century. Herded onto steamboats or slave ships or forced to walk hundreds of miles manacled in iron collars and chains, they lived in “perpetual dread” of the Gulf states’ harsh working conditions and broiling summer heat and humidity. The sight of slave “coffles” being driven southward aroused a sense of shame in some observers. One described “a wretched cavalcade . . . marching half naked women, and men loaded with chains, without being charged with any crime but that of being black, from one section of the United States to another, hundreds of miles.” Slaves sent “downriver” were also despondent about being torn from their wives, children, and friends. One song expressed their anguish: “Massa sell poor negro, ho, heave, O! / Leave poor wife and children, ho, heave, O!” Some tried to run away. Others maimed themselves to avoid being “sent south.” A woman killed herself because “they have carried my children off with ‘em.” The frontier environment in the Old Southwest was rude, rough, and lively. Men had a “hell of a lot of fun.” They often drank, gambled, and fought. In 1834, a South Carolina migrant urged his brother to move west and join him because “you can live like a fighting cock with us.” Most Old Southwest plantations had their own stills to manufacture whiskey, and alcoholism ravaged many frontier families. Violence was commonplace, and the frequency of stabbings, shootings, and murders shocked visitors. Shocking, too, were the ways that white men abused women, both black and white. An Alabama woman was outraged by the “beastly passions” of the white men who fathered slave children and then sold them like livestock. She also recorded in her diary instances of men regularly beating their wives. Another woman wrote about a friend whose husband abused her, explaining that she had little choice but to suffer in silence, for she was “wholly dependent upon his care.” The contrasting gender experiences in the Old Southwest were highlighted in a letter in which a woman reported: “All the men is very well pleased but the women is not very well satisfied.”

 the spreading cotton kingdom

 By 1860, the center of the “Cotton Kingdom” stretched from eastern North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia through the fertile A ­ labama-​­Mississippi “black belt” (so called for the color of the fertile soil), through Louisiana, on to Texas, and up the Mississippi Valley as far as southern Illinois. Steamboats made the Mississippi River the cotton highway by transporting millions of bales downriver from Kentucky, Tennessee, Arkansas, Mississippi, and Louisiana to New Orleans, where sailing ships took the cotton to

The Cotton Kingdom  475


 New York, New England, Great Britain, and France. King Cotton accounted for more than half of all U.S. exports. By 1860, Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana were the three ­top-​­producing cotton states, and two thirds of the richest Americans lived in the South. More millionaires per capita lived in Natchez, Mississippi, along the great river, than anywhere in the world. The rapid expansion of the cotton belt ensured that the South became more dependent on enslaved black workers. More than half of the slaves in the South worked in cotton production. The dynamic system of slavery was, as John Quincy Adams wrote in his diary, “the great and foul stain” upon the nation’s commitment to liberty and equality. It persisted because it was such a powerful engine of economic ­development—​­and the most tangible sign of economic success. Enterprising young white men judged wealth and status by the number of slaves owned. By 1860, the dollar value of enslaved blacks outstripped the value of all American banks, railroads, and factories combined. The soaring profitability of cotton fostered a false sense of security. In 1860, a Mississippi newspaper boasted that the South, “safely entrenched behind her cotton bags . . . can defy the w ­ orld—​­for the civilized world depends on the cotton of the South.” Cotton bred cockiness. In a speech to the U.S. Senate in 1858, South Carolina’s former governor, James Henry Hammond, who owned a huge cotton plantation worked by more than 100 slaves, warned the critics of slavery in the North: “You dare not make war on cotton. No power on earth dares make war upon it. Cotton is King.”

 King Cotton Captured This engraving shows cotton being trafficked in Louisiana.

 476  CHAPTER 11  The South, Slavery, and King Cotton 1800–1860

 What Hammond failed to acknowledge was that the southern economy had grown dangerously dependent on European demand for raw cotton. By 1860, Great Britain was importing more than 80 percent of its cotton from the American South. Hammond and other southern leaders did not anticipate what they could least afford: a sudden collapse in world demand for southern cotton. In 1860, the expansion of the British textile industry peaked, and the price paid for southern cotton began a steady decline. By then, however, the Lower South was committed to l­arge-​­scale cotton production for generations to come.

Whites in the Old South
 Over time, the culture of cotton and slavery shaped the South’s social structure and provided much of its political power. Unlike in the North and Midwest, southern society was dominated by an elite group of planters and merchants.

 white planters

 Although there were only a few giant plantations in each southern state, their owners exercised overwhelming influence. As a Virginian observed in the m ­ id-​­1830s, “the old slaveholding families exerted a great deal of control . . . and they affected the manner and prejudices of the slaveholding part of the state.” The large planters behaved like an aristocracy, viewing their poor white neighbors with a contempt that was readily reciprocated. They often spent their time hunting and fishing, gambling and racing horses, hosting elaborate parties and importing wines and furnishings. In short, they indulged expensive habits and tastes that they often could neither afford nor control. Living the storied life of a planter was the focus of their energies, their honor, and often, their indebtedness. As a plantation slave recalled, his master on Sundays liked to “gamble, run horses, or fight g­ ame-​­cocks, discuss politics, and drink whisky, and brandy and water all day long.” The richest planters and merchants were determined to retain their control over southern society, in part because of ­self-​­interest and in part because they assumed they were the region’s natural leaders. “Inequality is the fundamental law of the universe,” declared one planter. James Henry Hammond was even more blunt, declaring that the South Carolina planters are “essentially what the nobility are in other countries. They stand at the head of society and politics.” Slavery, he argued, “does indeed create an ­aristocracy—​­an aristocracy of talents, of virtue, of generosity, and courage.”

Whites in the Old South  477


 In addition to its size, what distinguished a plantation from a farm was the use of a large number of slaves supervised by drivers and overseers. Planters themselves rarely engaged in manual labor. They focused on managing the overseers and handling the marketing and sale of the cotton, tobacco, rice, or sugar. Most planters had begun their careers as land traders, investors, cotton merchants (called “factors”), and farmers. Over time, they made enough money to acquire a plantation worked by slaves. Frederick Stanton, a cotton broker near Natchez, Mississippi, became a planter with 444 slaves working 15,000 acres of cotton. Success required careful monitoring of the markets for cotton, land, and slaves as well as careful management of the workers and production. If, as historians have agreed, one had to own at least twenty slaves to be called a planter, only one out of thirty whites in the South in 1860 was a planter. Eleven planters, among the wealthiest people in the nation, owned 500 slaves each; and one planter, a South Carolina rice grower, owned 1,000. The 10,000 most powerful planters, accounting for less than 3 percent of white men in the South, held more than half the slaves. The gap between the planters and the rest of southern society was wide. Two thirds of white southern families in 1830 owned no slaves. Over time, planters and their wives (referred to as “mistresses”) grew accustomed to being waited on by slaves, day and night. A Virginia planter told a British visitor that a slave girl slept in the master bedroom with him and his wife. When his British guest asked why, he replied: “Good heaven! If I wanted a glass of water during the night, what would become of me?” From colonial times, most southern white men embraced an unwritten social code centered on a prickly sense of personal honor in which they were expected to defend their reputations with words, fists, knives, or guns. Duels to the death (called “affairs of honor”) were the ultimate expression of manly honor. Many prominent southern ­leaders—​­congressmen, senators, governors, editors, and ­planters—​­engaged in duels with pistols, although dueling was technically illegal in many states. The roster of participants included President Andrew Jackson of Tennessee and Senator Henry Clay of Kentucky. But men of all classes were ready to fight at the first sign of disrespect.

 the plantation mistress

 The South, like the North, was a ­ ale-​­dominated society, only more so because of the slave system. A promm inent Georgian, Christopher Memminger, explained that slavery heightened the need for a hierarchical social and family structure. White wives

 478  CHAPTER 11  The South, Slavery, and King Cotton 1800–1860

 and children needed to be as subservient and compliant as enslaved blacks. “Each planter,” he declared, “is in fact a P ­ atriarch—​­his position compels him to be a ruler in his household,” and he requires “obedience and subordination.” The plantation mistress seldom led a life of idle leisure, nor was she a frail, helpless creature focused solely on planning parties and balls. Although she had slaves to attend to her needs, she supervised the domestic household in the same way as the planter took care of the cotton business. Overseeing the supply and preparation of food and linens, she also managed the housecleaning and care of the sick, the birthing of babies, and the operations Mary Boykin Chesnut Her diary of the dairy. A plantation slave rememdescribing life in the Confederacy bered that her mistress “was with all during the Civil War was republished in the slave women every time a baby 1981 and won the Pulitzer Prize. was born. Or, when a plague of misery hit the folks, she knew what to do and what kind of medicine to chase off the aches and pains.” The son of a Tennessee slaveholder remembered that his mother and grandmother were “the busiest women I ever saw,” in part because they themselves had babies every year or so, often birthing over a dozen children during their lifetimes. Mary Boykin Chesnut, a plantation mistress in South Carolina, complained that “there is no slave, after all, like a wife.” She admitted that she had few rights in the large household she managed, since her husband was the “master of the house.” A wife was expected to love, honor, obey, and serve her husband. Virginian George Fitzhugh, a celebrated Virginia attorney and writer, spoke for most southern men when he said that a “man loves his children because they are weak, helpless, and dependent. He loves his wife for similar reasons.” Planters had little interest in an educated wife. When people tried to raise funds for a woman’s college in Georgia, a planter angrily refused to contribute, explaining that “all that a woman needs to know is how to read the New Testament and to spin and weave clothing for her family. I would not have one of your graduates for a wife, and I will not give you a cent for any such project.”

Whites in the Old South  479


 White women living in a slaveholding culture confronted a double standard in terms of moral and sexual behavior. They were expected to be examples of Christian morality and sexual purity, even as their husbands, brothers, and sons often engaged in ­self-​­indulgent hedonism, gambling, drinking, carousing, and sexually assaulting enslaved women. “Under slavery,” Mary Chesnut wrote in her famous diary, “we live surrounded by prostitutes.” Yet she did not blame enslaved women for playing that role. They were usually forced to do so. In fact, many planters justified their behavior by highlighting the additional money they were creating by impregnating enslaved women. “God forgive us,” Chesnut added, “but ours is a monstrous system. Like the patriarchs of old, our men live all in one house with their wives and their [enslaved] concubines [lovers]; and the mulattoes [people of mixed races] one sees in every family partly resemble the white children. Any lady is ready to tell you who is the father of all the mulatto children in everybody’s household but her own. Those, she seems to think, drop from the clouds.” Such a double standard reinforced the arrogant authoritarianism of many white planters. In the secrecy of her diary, Mary Chesnut used sexual metaphors to express the limitations of most of the Carolina planters, writing that they “are nice fellows, but slow to move; impulsive but hard to keep moving. They are wonderful for a spurt, but that lets out all of their strength.” Yet for all their private complaints and daily burdens, few plantation mistresses, including Mary Chesnut, spoke out against the ­male-​­dominated social order and racist climate. They largely accepted the limited domestic role assigned them by men such as George Howe, a South Carolina religion professor. In 1850, he complimented southern women for understanding their subordinate place. “Born to lean upon others, rather than to stand independently by herself, and to confide in an arm stronger than hers,” the southern woman had no desire for “power” outside the home, he said. The few women who were demanding equality were “unsexing” themselves and were “despised and detested” by their families and communities. Most plantation mistresses agreed with Howe. With but a few exceptions, observed Julia Gardiner Tyler, the ­northern-​­born wife of President John Tyler, a Virginia slaveholder, women should limit themselves to the roles that “God designed for them”—“as wife, mother, mistress.” Another prominent southern woman, Mary Howard Schoolcraft, described herself and other plantation wives in South Carolina as “old fogies” who refused to believe that “slavery is a sin.” She could not imagine doing without the comforts and conveniences “afforded by slaves.”

 overseers and drivers

 On large plantations, overseers managed the slaves and were responsible for maintaining the buildings, fences,

 480  CHAPTER 11  The South, Slavery, and King Cotton 1800–1860

 and grounds. They usually were white farmers or skilled workers, the sons of planters, or simply poor whites eager to rise in stature. Some were themselves slaveholders. The overseers moved often in search of better wages and cheaper land. A Mississippi planter described white overseers as “a worthless set of vagabonds.” Likewise, Frederick Douglass, a mulatto who escaped from slavery in Maryland, said his overseer was “a miserable drunkard, a profane swearer, and a savage monster” always armed with a b ­ lood-​­stained bullwhip and a club that he used so cruelly that he even “enraged” the plantation owner. The overseer tolerated no excuses or explanations. “To be accused was to be convicted, and to be convicted was to be punished,” Douglass said. Usually, the highest managerial position a slave could hope for on a plantation was that of driver, a favored man whose job was to oversee a small group (“gang”) of slaves, getting them up and organized each morning by sunrise, and then directing their work (and punishing them) until dark. Over the years, there were numerous examples of slaves murdering drivers for being too cruel. There were a few black overseers. Francis Frederic, a slave in Kentucky, remembered that his grandmother’s white master was a “hard one.” He appointed her son, a slave, as the plantation’s overseer. After the planter discovered that Frederic’s grandmother had committed the crime of attending an outlawed prayer meeting, he ordered her son to give her “forty lashes with a thong of a raw cow’­s-​­hide, her master standing over her the whole time blaspheming and threatening what he would do if her son did not lay it on.”

 “plain white folk”

 About half of white southerners were small farmers, “plain white folk” who were usually uneducated, often illiterate, and forced to scratch out hardscrabble lives of bare ­self-​­sufficiency. These small farmers (yeomen) typically lived with their families in simple ­two-​­room cabins on fifty acres or less. They raised a few pigs and chickens and grew enough corn and cotton to live on. They traded with neighbors more than they bought from stores. Women on these small farms worked in the fields during harvest time but spent most of their days doing household chores while raising lots of children. Farm children grew up fast. By age four they could carry a water bucket from the well to the house and collect eggs from the henhouse. Young boys could plant, weed, and harvest crops, feed livestock, and milk cows. The average slaveholder was a small farmer working alongside five or six slaves. Such “middling” farmers usually lived in a log cabin rather than a columned mansion. In the backcountry and mountainous regions of the South, where slaves and plantations were scarce, small farmers dominated the social structure. Southern farmers tended to be fiercely independent and suspicious of government authority, and they overwhelmingly identified with the Democratic

Black Society in the South  481


 party of Andrew Jackson. Although only a minority of ­middle-​­class white farmers owned slaves, most of them supported the slave system. They feared that slaves, if freed, would compete with them for land and jobs, and, although not wealthy, the farmers enjoyed the privileged social status that ­race-​­based slavery afforded them. As a white farmer told a northern traveler, “Now suppose they [slaves] was free. You see they’d all think themselves as good as we.” James Henry Hammond and other rich white planters frequently reminded their white neighbors who owned no slaves that “in a slave country, every freeman is an aristocrat” because blacks are beneath them in the social order. Such racist sentiments pervaded the Lower S­ outh—​­and much of the rest of the n ­ ation—​­throughout the nineteenth century.

 “poor whites”

 Visitors to the Old South often had trouble telling small farmers apart from the “poor whites,” a category of desperately poor people who were relegated to the least desirable land and lived on the fringes of society. The “poor whites,” often derided as “crackers,” “hillbillies,” or “trash,” were usually day laborers or squatters who owned neither land nor slaves. Some 40 percent of white southerners worked as “tenants,” renting land from others, or as farm laborers, toiling for others. They frequently took refuge in the pine barrens, mountain hollows, and swamps after having been pushed aside by the more enterprising and the more successful. They usually lived in log cabins or shacks and often made their own clothing, barely managing each year to keep their families clothed, dry, and fed.

Black Society in the South
 Southern society was literally black and white. Whites had the power, and enslaved blacks were often treated as property rather than people. The system of slavery relied on overwhelming force and fear and was intentionally dehumanizing. “We believe the negro to belong to an inferior race,” one planter declared. Southern apologists for slavery often stressed that African Americans were “inferior” beings incapable of living on their own. Thomas Reade Cobb proclaimed that they were better off “in a state of bondage.” Effective slave management therefore required teaching slaves to understand that they were supposed to be treated like animals. As Henry Garner, an escaped slave, explained, the aim of slaveholders was “to make you as much like brutes as possible.” Others justified slavery as a form of benevolent paternalism. George Fitzhugh said that the enslaved black was “but a ­grown-​­up child, and must be governed as a child.”

 482  CHAPTER 11  The South, Slavery, and King Cotton 1800–1860

 Such ­self-​­serving paternalism had one ultimate purpose: profits. Planters, explained a southerner, “care for nothing but to buy Negroes to raise cotton & raise cotton to buy Negroes.” In 1818, James Steer in Louisiana predicted that enslaved blacks would be the best investment that southerners could make. Eleven years later, in 1829, the North Carolina Supreme Court declared that slavery existed to increase “the profit of the Master.” The role of the slave was “to toil while another [the owners] reap the fruits.” Those in the business of buying and selling slaves reaped huge profits. One of them reported in the 1850s that “a nigger that wouldn’t bring over $300, seven years ago, will fetch $1000, cash, quick, this year.” Thomas Clemson of South Carolina, the s­ on-​­in-​­law of John C. Calhoun, candidly explained that “my object is to get the most I can for the property [slaves]. . . . I care but little to whom and how they are sold, whether together [as families] or separated.” Owning, working, and selling slaves was the quickest way to wealth and social status in the South. The wife of a Louisiana planter complained in 1829 that white people talked constantly about how the profits generated by growing cotton enabled them to buy “plantations & negrows.” In 1790, the United States had fewer than 700,000 enslaved African Americans. By 1830, it had more than 2 million, and by 1860, almost 4 million, virtually all of them in the South and border states.

 the slave system

 As the enslaved population grew, slaveholders developed an increasingly complex system of rules, regulations, and restrictions. Formal slave codes in each state regulated the treatment of slaves in order to deter runaways or rebellions. Slaves could not leave their owner’s land or household without permission or stay out after dark without an identification pass. Some codes made it a crime for slaves to learn to read and write, for fear that they might pass notes to plan a revolt. Frederick Douglass noted that slaveholders assumed that allowing slaves to learn to read and write “would spoil the best nigger in the world.” Slaves in most states could not testify in court, legally marry, own firearms, or hit a white man, even in ­self-​­defense. They could also be abused, tortured, and whipped. Despite such restrictions and brutalities, however, the enslaved managed to create their own communities and cultures within the confines of the slave system, forging bonds of care, solidarity, recreation, and religion.

 “free persons of color”

 African Americans who were not enslaved were called free persons of color. They occupied an uncertain and

Black Society in the South  483


 often vulnerable social status between bondage and freedom. Many of them lived in constant fear of being kidnapped into slavery. To be sure, free blacks had more rights than slaves. They could enter into contracts, marry, own property (including slaves of their own), and pass on their property to their children. But they were not viewed or treated as equal to whites. In most states, they could not vote, own weapons, attend white church services, or testify against whites in court. In South Carolina, free people of color had to pay an annual tax and were not allowed to leave the state. After 1823, Yarrow Mamout As an enslaved they were required to have a white African Muslim, Mamout purchased his freedom, acquired property, “guardian” and an identity card. and settled in ­present-​­day Some slaves were able to pur- Washington, D.C. Charles Willson chase their freedom, and others were Peale painted this portrait in 1819, when freed (“manumitted”) by their owners. Mamout was over 100 years old. By 1860, approximately 250,000 free blacks lived in the slave states, most of them in coastal cities such as Baltimore, Charleston, Savannah, Mobile, and New Orleans. Many were skilled workers. Some were tailors, shoemakers, or carpenters; others were painters, bricklayers, butchers, blacksmiths, or barbers. Still others worked on the docks or on steamships. Free black women usually worked as seamstresses, laundresses, or house servants. ­ eople Among the free black population were a large number of mulattoes, p of mixed racial ancestry. The census of 1860 reported 412,000 mulattoes in the United States, or about 10 percent of the black p ­ opulation—​­probably a drastic undercount. In cities such as Charleston, and especially New Orleans, “colored” society occupied a shifting status somewhere between that of blacks and that of whites. Although most free people of color were poor, some mulattoes built substantial fortunes and even became slaveholders themselves. William Ellison was the richest freedman in the South. Liberated by his white father in 1816, he developed a thriving business in South Carolina making cotton gins while managing his own 900-acre plantation worked by more than sixty slaves. ­Ellison,

 484  CHAPTER 11  The South, Slavery, and King Cotton 1800–1860

 Free blacks This badge, issued in Charleston, South Carolina, was worn by a free black so that he would not be mistaken for someone’s “property.”

 the trade in slaves

 like other wealthy mulattoes, came to view himself as a “brown ­aristocrat.” He yearned to be accepted as an equal in white society; during the Civil War, he supported the Confederacy. In Louisiana, a mulatto, Cyprien Ricard, paid $250,000 for an estate that had ­ninety-​ one slaves. In Natchez, ­ ­ Mississippi, William Johnson, son of a white father and a mulatto mother, operated three barbershops, owned 1,500 acres of land, and held several slaves. Black or mulatto slaveholders were few in number, however. The 1830 census reported that 3,775 free blacks, about 2 percent of the total free black population, owned 12,760 slaves. Many of the African American slaveholders were men who bought or inherited their own family members.

 The rapid rise in the slave population during the early nineteenth century mainly occurred naturally, through slave births, especially after Congress and President Thomas Jefferson outlawed the ­African slave trade in 1808. By 1820, over 80 percent of slaves were American born. Once the African slave trade was outlawed, the s­lave-​­trading network within the United States became much more ­ important—​­ and profitable. Between 1800 and 1860, the average price of slaves quadrupled, in large part because of the dramatic expansion of the cotton culture in the Old Southwest. Breeding and selling slaves became a big business. Over a twenty year period, a Virginia plantation owned by John Tayloe III recorded 252 slave births and 142 slave deaths, thus providing Tayloe with 110 extra slaves to be deployed on the plantation, given to his sons, or sold to traders. To manage the growing slave trade, markets and auction houses sprang up in every southern city. New Orleans alone had twenty ­slave-​­trading businesses. Each year, thousands of slaves circulated through the city’s “slave pens.” There they were converted from people into products with prices. They were bathed

Black Society in the South  485


 and groomed; “fattened up” with bacon, milk, and butter, like cattle; assigned categories such as Prime, No. 1, No. 2, and Second Rate; and “packaged” for sale by being dressed in identical blue suits or dresses. On auction day, they were paraded into the sale room. The tallest, strongest, and “blackest” young men brought the highest prices. As a slaver stressed, “I must have if possible the jet black Negroes, for they stand the The business of slavery This advertisement for the Blount & Dawson trading company climate best.” Buyers physically inspected each guarantees its clients “secure and good accommodations for all negroes left with us for slave on the “auction block” as if they Sale or S ­ afe-​­Keeping” in its newly acquired jail, were horses or cattle. They squeezed opposite the state bank. their muscles, felt their joints, worked their fingers back and forth, pried open their mouths to examine their teeth and gums. They then forced the slaves to strip and carefully inspected their naked bodies, looking for signs of disease or deformities. They particularly focused on any scars from whipping. As Solomon Northup noted, “scars on a slave’s back were considered evidence of a rebellious or unruly spirit, and hurt [his chances for] sale.” During the 1830s, slave traders began advertising “fancy girls” among the slaves to be auctioned. The term referred to young African American women, distinctive for their beauty, who would fetch higher prices because of their sexual attractiveness. As a historian of the slave trade noted, “Slavery’s frontier was a white man’s sexual playground.” Once the crude inspections ended, buyers bid on the slaves, purchased them, and then transported them to their new homes. Almost a million captive African Americans, many of them children, were “sold South” or “downriver” and taken to the Old Southwest during the first half of the nineteenth century. Planters purchasing slaves knew what they wanted. “It is better to buy none in families,” said a Mississippi buyer, “but to select only choice, first rate, young hands from 16 to 25 years of age (buying no children or aged negroes).” The worst aspect of the domestic slave trade was the separation of children from parents and husbands from wives. Children were often taken from their parents and sold to new masters. In Missouri, one enslaved woman saw six of her seven children, ages one to eleven, sold to six different owners. Only

 486  CHAPTER 11  The South, Slavery, and King Cotton 1800–1860

THE SLAVE POPULATION, 1820

ATLANTIC OCEAN

GULF OF MEXICO



 Each dot represents 200 slaves.

■






300 Miles


300 Kilometers


 Consider where the largest populations of slaves were clustered in the South in

WWN64
Why were most slaves living in these regions and not in others? Figure1820. M11_3 ■ proof How was the experience of plantation slavery different for men and women? First 29p6 x 34p9 
Black Society in the South  487


THE SLAVE POPULATION, 1860

ATLANTIC OCEAN

GULF OF MEXICO



■




300 Miles


300 Kilometers


 Compare this map with the map of cotton production on page 473.

 WWN64 patterns do you see? FigureWhat M11_4 ■ Why did many slaves resist migrating west? First proof 29p6 x 34p9

 488  CHAPTER 11  The South, Slavery, and King Cotton 1800–1860

 ­ ouisiana and Alabama (from 1852) prohibited separating a child younger L than ten from his or her mother, and no state prevented the separation of a slave husband from his wife.

 slavery as a way of life

 The lives of slaves differed greatly from place to place, depending in part on the personality of their owner; in part on whether the enslaved were focused on growing rice, sugar, tobacco, or cotton; and in part on whether they were on farms or in cities. Although many slaves were artisans or craftsmen (carpenters, blacksmiths, furniture makers, butchers, boatmen, house servants, cooks, nurses, maids, weavers, basket makers, etc.), the vast majority were field hands who were often organized into work gangs supervised by a black “driver” or white overseer. Some slaves were “hired out” to other planters or to merchants, churches, or businesses. Others worked on Sundays or holidays to earn cash of their own. Plantation slaves were usually housed in ­one-​­or ­two-​­room wooden shacks with dirt floors. The wealthiest planters built slave cabins out of brick. Beds were a luxury, even though they were little more than boards covered with straw. Most slaves were expected to sleep on the cold, damp floor with only a cheap blanket for warmth. A set of inexpensive linen or cotton clothes was distributed twice a year, but shoes were generally provided only in winter. About half of all slave babies died in their first year, a rate more than twice that of whites. The weekly or monthly food allotment was cheap and monotonous: corn meal and pork, often served in bowls placed on the ground, as if the slaves were livestock. Planters were quite varied in their personalities and practices. Philip Jones, a Louisiana slave, observed that “many planters were humane and kind.” Others were not. “Massa was purty good,” one e­ x-​­slave recalled. “He treated us jus’ ‘bout like you would a good mule.” Another said his master “fed us reg’lar on good, ‘stantial food, jus’ like you’d tend to your hoss [horse], if you had a real good one.” A slave born in 1850 had a life expectancy of ­thirty-​­six years; the life expectancy of whites was forty years. Solomon Northup, a freeborn African American from New York with a wife and three children, was kidnapped in 1845 by slave traders, taken first to Washington, D.C., and then to New Orleans, and eventually sold to a “repulsive and coarse” Louisiana cotton planter. More than a decade later, Northup was able to regain his freedom. In Twelve Years a Slave (1853), Northup described his living and working conditions. His bed “was a plank twelve inches wide and ten feet long. My pillow was a stick of wood. The bedding was a coarse blanket.” The log cabin where he and others slept had a dirt floor and no windows. Each day, “an

Black Society in the South  489


 hour before daylight, the horn is blown. Then the slaves arouse, prepare their breakfast . . . and hurry to the field.” If found in their “quarters after daybreak,” slaves were flogged. “It was rarely that a day passed by without one or more whippings. . . . The crack of the lash, and the shrieking of the slaves, can be heard from dark till bed time.” Field hands worked from sunrise to sunset, six days a week. At times they were worked at night as well, ginning cotton, milling sugarcane, grinding corn, or doing other indoor tasks. Women, remembered a slave, “had to work all day in de fields an’ den come home an’ do the housework at night.” Sundays were precious days off. Slaves used the Sabbath to hunt, fish, dance to banjo and fiddle music, tell stories, or tend their own small gardens. Beginning in August and lasting several months, the focus was on picking cotton. The productivity per slave increased dramatically during the first half of the nineteenth century, in large part because of the implementation of the “pushing system.” During harvest season, each slave was assigned a daily quota of cotton to be picked, an amount that increased over the years. Gangs of slaves, men and women, would sweep across a field, pull the bolls from the thorny pods, and stuff them in large sacks or baskets which they dragged behind them. All the while, they were watched and prodded by an overseer, bullwhip in hand, forcing them to keep up the pace. Solomon Northup remembered picking cotton until it was “too dark to see, and when the moon is full, they oftentimes labor till the middle of the night.” Each evening, the baskets would be weighed and the number of pounds recorded on a slate board by each picker’s name. Those who fell short of their quota were scolded and whipped.

 the violence of slavery

 Although some owners and slaves developed close and even affectionate relationships, slavery on the whole was a system rooted in brutal force. The difference between a good owner and a bad one, according to one slave, was the difference between one “who did not whip you too much” and one who “whipped you till he’d bloodied you and blistered you.” One overseer in South Carolina whipped eight women simply for hoeing “bad corn.” Others were whipped for “not picking cotton”; “for not picking as well as he can”; or for picking “very trashy cotton.” Bennett Barrow, a Louisiana planter, on average had a slave whipped every four days as a means of symbolizing his absolute control. Allen Sidney, a slave, recalled an incident on a Mississippi plantation that illustrated the ruthlessness of cotton production. A slave who fell behind while picking cotton resisted when a black driver started to “whip him up.” Upon seeing the fracas, the white overseer, mounted on horseback, galloped over,

 490  CHAPTER 11  The South, Slavery, and King Cotton 1800–1860

 and shot the resisting slave, killing him. “None of the other slaves,” Sidney noted, “said a word or turned their heads. They kept on hoeing as if nothing had happened.” At times, whites turned the punishment of slaves into grisly spectacles to strike fear into anyone considering rebellion or escape. In Louisiana, whippings often followed a horrific procedure, as a visitor reported: “Three stakes is drove into the ground in a triangular manner, about six feet apart. The culprit [slave] is told to lie down . . . flat on his belly. The arms is extended out, sideways, and each hand tied to a stake hard and fast. The feet is both tied to the third stake, all Jack (1850) Daguerrotype of a slave identified only as Jack, on the plantation stretched tight.” The overseer would of B. F. Taylor in Columbia, South then step back “seven, eight or ten feet Carolina. and with a rawhide whip about 7 feet long . . . lays on with great force and address across the Buttocks,” cutting strips of flesh “7 or 8 inches long at every stroke.”

 urban slavery Slaves living in southern cities such as Richmond, Memphis, Atlanta, New Orleans, or Charleston had a much different experience from those on isolated farms and plantations. “A city slave is almost a freeman,” claimed a Maryland slave. Slaves in urban households tended to be better fed and clothed and had more privileges. They interacted not only with their white owners but with the extended interracial c­ ommunity—​­shopkeepers and police, neighbors and strangers. Some were hired out to others and were often allowed to keep a portion of their wages. Generally speaking, slaves in cities enjoyed greater mobility and freedom than their counterparts in rural areas. enslaved women

 Although enslaved men and women often performed similar chores, especially on farms, they did not experience slavery in the same way. Once slaveholders realized how profitable a fertile female slave could be by giving birth to babies that could later be sold, they “encouraged”

Black Society in the South  491


 female slaves to have as many children as possible. A South Carolina planter named William Johnson explained in 1815 that the “interest of the owner is to obtain from his slaves labor and increase [in their numbers].” Sometimes a woman would be locked in a cabin with a male slave whose task was to impregnate her. Pregnant slaves were given less work and more food. Some plantation owners rewarded new mothers with dresses and silver dollars. But if motherhood provided enslaved women with greater stature and benefits, it also was exhausting. Within days after childbirth, mothers were put back to work spinning, weaving, or sewing. A few weeks thereafter, they were sent back to the fields; ­breast-​­feeding mothers were often forced to take their babies with them, strapped to their backs. Enslaved women were expected to do “man’s work”: cut trees, haul logs, spread fertilizer, plow fields, dig ditches, slaughter animals, hoe corn, and pick cotton. Many of them, in fact, were more productive cotton pickers than the men. As an escaped slave reported, “Women who do outdoor work are used as bad as men.” Once women passed their childbearing years, their workload increased. Slaveholders put ­middle-​­aged women to work f­ull-​­time in the fields or performing

 Slave family in a Georgia cotton field The invention of the cotton gin sent cotton production soaring, deepening the South’s dependence on slavery in the process.

 492  CHAPTER 11  The South, Slavery, and King Cotton 1800–1860

 other outdoor labor. On large plantations, elderly women, called grannies, kept the children during the day, and slave women also worked as cooks and seamstresses, midwives and nurses, healers and folk doctors. Enslaved girls and women also faced the constant threat of sexual abuse. James Henry Hammond, the prominent South Carolina planter and former governor, confessed that he was a powerful man of passion who nurtured a “system of roguery” among his female slaves. He had a long affair with one of his young female slaves, Sally Johnson, who bore several of his children. Later, to the horror of his l­ong-​­suffering wife, Hammond began another affair with one of his and Sally’s daughters, ­twelve-​­year-​­old Louisa, and fathered more children with her. (Hammond also had scandalous affairs with four “lovely and luscious” t­ een-​­aged nieces and two daughters of his ­sister-​­in-​­law).

 celia

 The tragic story of a slave girl named Celia reveals the moral complexity of slavery for African American women and the limited legal options available to the enslaved. As Celia discovered, slaves often could improve their circumstances only by making horrible choices that offered no guarantee of success. In 1850, f­ ourteen-​­year-​­old Celia was purchased by Robert Newsom, a Missouri farmer who told his daughters that he had bought the girl to be their servant. In fact, however, the recently widowed Newsom wanted a sexual slave. After purchasing Celia, he raped her, and for the next five years, he treated her as his mistress, even building her a brick cabin fifty yards from his house. During that time, she gave birth to two children. On June 23, 1855, the s­ixty-​­five-​­year-​­old Newsom entered Celia’s cabin, ignored her frantic appeals, and kept assaulting her until she struck and killed him with a large stick and then burned his body in the fireplace. Celia was not allowed to testify at her murder trial because she was a slave. The judge and jury, all white men, pronounced her guilty, and on December 21, 1855, she was hanged. The grim story of Celia’s abusive owner and her own brief life illustrates the lopsided power structure in southern society at the time. Celia bore a double burden, that of being a slave and also of being a woman living in a ­male-​­dominated society rife with racism and sexism.

Forging a Slave Community
 Despite being victims of terrible injustice and abuse, enslaved African Americans displayed endurance, resilience, and achievement. Wherever they could, they forged their own sense of community, asserted their individuality, and

Forging a Slave Community  493


 devised ingenious ways to resist their confinement. Many slaves, especially those on the largest plantations, would gather at secret “night meetings,” usually after midnight, where they would drink stolen alcohol, dance, sing, and tell stories of resistance. Many of the stories were derived from African tales, such as that of “Brer [Brother] Rabbit,” a smart little rabbit who used his wits to elude the larger animals stalking him by hiding in a patch of prickly briars. Such frequently told stories impressed upon slaves the importance of deceiving those with power over them. Many religious spirituals, the predecessors to the blues, also contained double meanings, often expressing a longing to get to a “free country,” what slaves called “Sweet Canaan” or the “promised land.” The spiritual “Wade in the Water,” for example, contained underlying instructions to runaways about how to evade capture. Avoiding dry land and running in creek beds (“wading in the water”) were common ways to throw off pursuing bloodhounds. Songs such as “The Gospel Train” and “Swing Low, Sweet Chariot” included disguised references to the Underground Railroad, the secret organization that helped slaves escape to the North. Frederick Douglass recalled that the spirituals not only helped runaways but also were a form of protest. They “breathed the prayer and complaint of souls overflowing with the bitterest anguish. . . . The songs of the slave represent the sorrows of his heart, rather than his joys. Like tears, they were a relief to aching hearts.”

 the slave family Although states did not recognize slave marriages, they did not prevent men and women from choosing life partners and forging families within the constraints of the slave system. Many slaveholders accepted unofficial marriages as a stabilizing influence; a black man who supported a family, they assumed, would be more reliable and obedient. Sometimes slaveholders performed “wedding” ceremonies in the slave quarters or had a minister conduct the service. Whatever the formalities, the norm for the slave community, as for the white, was the nuclear family, with the father as the head of the household. A slave’s childhood did not last long. At five or six years of age, children were put to work; they collected trash and firewood, picked cotton, scared away crows from planted fields, and ran errands. By age ten, they were f­ull-​ ­time field hands. Enslaved African Americans often extended the fellowship of family to those who worked with them, with older slave women being addressed as “granny,” or coworkers as “sis” or “brother.” Such efforts to create a sense of extended family resembled kinship practices in Africa. One white teacher visiting a slave community observed that they “all belonged to one immense family.”

 494  CHAPTER 11  The South, Slavery, and King Cotton 1800–1860

Religion in the Old South
 The Old South was made up of G ­ od-​­fearing people whose faith sustained them. Although there were pockets of Catholicism and Judaism in the large coastal c­ ities—​­Baltimore, Richmond, Charleston, Savannah, and New ­Orleans—​­the vast majority of southerners, white and black, embraced evangelical Protestant denominations such as Baptists and Methodists, both of which wanted to create a Kingdom of God on earth before the millennium, when Jesus would return (the “second coming”).

 slavery and religion In the late eighteenth century, Baptists and Methodists had condemned slavery, welcomed blacks to their congregations, and given women important roles in their churches. Many slaveholders, led by George Washington and Thomas Jefferson, had agonized over the immorality of slavery. By the 1830s, however, criticism of slavery in the southern states had virtually disappeared. Most preachers switched from attacking slavery to defending it as a divinely ordained, ­Bible-​­sanctioned social system that was a blessing to both master and slave. Alexander Glennie, a white minister, told slaves that their life of bondage was the “will of God.” Most ministers who refused to promote slavery left the region.

 Plantation Burial (1860) The slaves of Mississippi governor Tilghman Tucker gather in the woods to bury and mourn for one of their own. The painter of this scene, Englishman John Antrobus, would serve in the Confederate army during the Civil War.

Forging a Slave Community  495


 Frederick Douglass stressed that all of the men who owned him were Christians, but their faith never made a difference in how they treated their slaves. In 1832, Douglass’s master experienced a powerful conversion to Christianity at a Methodist revival and became a religious “exhorter” himself. He prayed “morning, noon, and night,” but his devotion to Christ had no effect on how he treated his slaves. In fact, he was even “more cruel and hateful,” quoting a Bible verse as he whipped a lame young woman: “The servant that knoweth his master’s will, and doeth it not, shall be beaten with many stripes.”

 african american religion

 Among the most important elements of African American culture was its dynamic religion, a mixture of African, Caribbean, and Christian elements often practiced in secret because many slaveholders feared enslaved workers might use group religious services to organize rebellions. Religion provided slaves both relief for the soul and release for their emotions. Most Africans brought with them to the Americas belief in a Creator, or Supreme God, whom they could recognize in the Christian God, and whom they might identify with Christ, the Holy Ghost, and the saints. But they also believed in spirits, magic, charms, and ­conjuring—​­the casting of spells. A conjurer, it was believed, was like a witch doctor or a voodoo priest who could suddenly make someone sick or heal the afflicted. Whites usually tried to eliminate African religion and spirituality from the slave experience. Slaves responded by gathering secretly in what were called camp meetings, or bush meetings, to worship in their own way and share their joys, pains, and hopes. By 1860, about 20 percent of adult slaves had joined Christian denominations. Many others practiced aspects of the Christian faith but were not considered Christians. As a white minister observed, some slaves had “heard of Jesus Christ, but who he is and what he has done for a ruined world, they cannot tell.” But few whites fully understood the dynamics or mysteries of slave religion or its power. Slaves found the Bible inspiring in its support for the poor and oppressed, and they embraced its promise of salvation through the sacrifice of Jesus. Likewise, the lyrics of religious spirituals helped slaves endure the strain of field labor and express their dreams of gaining freedom in “the promised land.” Spirituals offered musical deliverance from worldly woes and strengthened solidarity among slaves. One popular spiritual, “Go Down, Moses,” derived from the plight of the ancient Israelites held captive in Egypt, says: “We need not always weep and moan, / Let my people go. / And wear these slavery chains forlorn, / Let my people go.” Another spiritual gave song to hope: “I do believe! / I do believe! / I will overcome some day. ”

 496  CHAPTER 11  The South, Slavery, and King Cotton 1800–1860

 Many white planters assumed that Christianized slaves would be more passive and obedient. A south Georgia planter declared that a Christian slave “is more profitable than an unfaithful one. He will do more and better work, be less troublesome, and [even] less liable to disease.” Planter James Henry Hammond despised the emotional singing, ecstatic shouting, raucous clapping, and energetic prayers that animated African American worship. He banned dancing and the beating of drums. Hammond, however, wanted his “heathen” slaves to become Christians. To do so, he hired itinerant white ministers (“plantation preachers”) to conduct Christian services for them and constructed a Methodist church on his plantation. A white visitor who attended the church reported that there were no “religious excesses” or “hysteria” among the worshipping slaves. Hammond had forced them to display the religious passivity he desired.

Slave Rebellions
 The greatest fear of whites in the Lower South was an organized slave revolt, as had occurred in 1791 in the ­French-​­controlled sugar colony of ­Saint-​­Domingue, which eventually became the independent Republic of Haiti. In a rebellion unprecedented in history, slaves rose up and burned ­plantations, destroyed cane fields, and killed white planters and their families. The rebellion in ­Saint-​­Domingue, the world’s richest colony and the leading source of sugar and coffee, was the first successful slave revolt in the Western Hemisphere. It sent shock waves across the United States. Many terrified whites who fled Haiti arrived in Charleston, where they told of the horrors they had experienced. Despite repeated attempts by both French and British armies to reconquer Haiti, the former slaves, led by Toussaint L’Ouverture, defeated them all. The revolt in Haiti was the southern slaveholder’s greatest nightmare. As a prominent Virginian explained, a slave uprising would “deluge the southern country with blood.” Any sign of resistance or rebellion among the enslaved therefore risked a brutal and even gruesome response. In 1811, for example, two of Thomas Jefferson’s nephews, Lilburn and Isham Lewis, tied a ­seventeen-​­year-​­old slave named George to the floor of their Kentucky cabin and killed him with an axe in front of seven other slaves, all because George had run away several times. They then handed the axe to one of the slaves and forced him to dismember the body and put the pieces in the fireplace. The Lewises, who had been drinking heavily, wanted “to set an example for any other uppity slaves.”

 the prosser conspiracy

 The overwhelming authority and firepower of southern whites made organized resistance risky. The ­nineteenth-​

Forging a Slave Community  497


 c­ entury South witnessed only four major slave insurrections. The first occurred in 1800, when a slave named Gabriel Prosser, a blacksmith on a plantation near Richmond, Virginia, hatched a revolt involving hundreds of slaves. They planned to seize key points in the city, capture the governor, James Monroe, and overthrow the white elite. Gabriel expected the “poor white people” to join their effort. But someone alerted whites to the scheme, and a ferocious rainstorm forced “Gabriel’s army” to scatter. Gabriel and ­twenty-​­six of his fellow “soldiers” were captured and hanged, while ten others were deported to the West Indies. A white Virginian who observed the executions noted that the rebels on the gallows displayed a “sense of their [natural] rights, [and] a contempt for danger.”

 revolt in louisiana

 In early 1811, the largest slave revolt in American history occurred just north of New Orleans, where powerful sugarcane planters had acquired one of the largest populations of slaves in North America. Many of those slaves were ripe for revolt. Sugarcane was known as a “killer crop” because working conditions were so harsh that many slaves died from laboring in the intense heat and humidity. Late on January 8, a group of slaves led by Charles Deslondes, a trusted black overseer, broke into their owner’s plantation house along the east bank of the Mississippi River. The planter was able to escape, but his son was hacked to death. Deslondes and his fellow rebels seized weapons, horses, and militia uniforms. Reinforced by more slaves and emboldened by liquor, the rebels headed toward New Orleans, some fifty miles away. Along the way, they burned houses, killed whites, and gathered more recruits. Over the next two days, their ranks swelled to more than 200. Their success was ­short-​­lived, however. The territorial governor mobilized a group of angry ­whites—​­as well as several free blacks who were later praised for their “tireless zeal and dauntless courage”—to suppress the insurrection. U.S. Army units and militia joined in. Dozens of slaves were killed or wounded, and most of those who fled were soon captured. “We made considerable slaughter,” reported one white planter. Deslondes had his hands chopped off and was then shot in both thighs and his chest. As he was slowly bleeding to death, a bale of hay was scattered over him and ignited. As many as 100 slaves were tortured, killed, and beheaded, and the severed heads were placed on poles along the Mississippi River. A month after the rebellion was put down, a white resident noted that “all the negro difficulties have subsided and gentle peace prevails.”

 denmark vesey

 The Denmark Vesey plot in Charleston, South Carolina, involved a similar effort to assault the white population. Vesey was

 498  CHAPTER 11  The South, Slavery, and King Cotton 1800–1860

 a Caribbean slave who, in 1785, was taken to Charleston, where, like many urban slaves, he was allowed to work for pay in his free time, at nights, and on Sundays. In 1799, he purchased a lottery ticket and won $1,500, which he used to buy his freedom and start his own carpentry shop. He thereafter learned to read and write and organized a Bible study class for other free blacks in the African Methodist Episcopal (AME) Church. Yet he retained a simmering hatred for whites and for the slave system they imposed on blacks. In 1822, Vesey and several other blacks, including the colorful ­African-​ ­born Gullah Jack, developed a plan for a massive slave revolt. They would first capture the city’s arsenal and distribute its hundreds of rifles to both free and enslaved blacks. All whites in the city would then be killed, along with any blacks who refused to join the rebellion. Vesey then planned to burn the city, seize ships, and head for the black republic of Haiti. The Vesey plot never got off the ground, however. A slave who had been secretly recruited by Vesey told his master about the planned rebellion, and soon Vesey and 135 others were captured, arrested, and tried. The court found Vesey guilty of plotting to “trample on all laws, human and divine; to riot in blood, outrage, ­rapine . . . and conflagration, and to introduce anarchy and confusion in their most horrid forms.” Vesey and t­hirty-​­four others were executed; three dozen more were transported to ­Spanish-​­controlled Cuba and sold into slavery. The AME church in Charleston was closed and demolished. When told that he would be hanged, Vesey replied that “the work of insurrection will go on.” Vesey’s planned rebellion led South Carolina officials to place additional restrictions on the mobility of free blacks and black religious gatherings. It also influenced John C. Calhoun to abandon the nationalism of his early political career and become the South’s most outspoken advocate for states’ rights and slavery.

 nat turner’s rebellion

 Vesey’s thwarted slave rebellion was not the last, however. News of the Nat Turner insurrection of August 22, 1831, in Southampton County, Virginia, where blacks were the majority, panicked whites throughout the South. Turner, a trusted black overseer, was also a preacher and healer who believed God had instructed him to “proclaim liberty to the captive” slaves and lead a rebellion that would enact “the day of ­vengeance of our God.” He interpreted a solar eclipse in February 1831 as God’s signal for him to act. Turner chose August 21 as the day to launch his insurrection, in part because it was the fortieth anniversary of the Haitian slave rebellion. The revolt began when Turner, in the middle of the night, unlocked the door of his master’s house and let in a small group of slaves armed with axes. “Remember that ours is not a war for robbery, nor to satisfy our passions,” he

Forging a Slave Community  499


 instructed them; “it is a struggle for freedom.” They methodically murdered the owner, Joseph Travis, and his wife Sally, their ­twelve-​­year-​­old son, a young apprentice, and a baby, all sleeping in their beds. They then repeated the process at other farmhouses, where more slaves and some free blacks joined in. Some slaves tried to protect or hide their owners. Before the ­two-​­day revolt ended, ­fifty-​­seven whites had been killed, most of them women and children, including ten students at a school. Federal troops, Virginia militiamen, and volunteers crushed the revolt, indiscriminately killing scores of slaves in the process. A newspaper described the behavior of the white vigilantes as comparable in “barbarity to the atrocities of the insurgents.” Twenty African Americans were hanged, including three free blacks; several were decapitated, and their severed heads were placed on poles along the road. Turner, called the “­blood-​­stained monster,” avoided capture for six weeks. He then was tried, found guilty, and hanged. His dead body was dismembered, with body parts given to the victims’ families. More than any other slave uprising, Nat Turner’s Rebellion terrified whites by making real the lurking fear that enslaved blacks might launch ­organized revolts. A Virginia state legislator claimed that people suspected “that a Nat Turner might be in every family, that the same bloody deed could be acted over at any time.” The Virginia legislature responded by barring slaves from learning to read and write and from gathering for religious meetings. The city of Mobile, Alabama, prohibited gatherings of three or more slaves, and white ministers were dispatched to preach obedience to enslaved workers. In addition, states created more armed patrols to track down runaways. A former slave highlighted the The Confessions of Nat Turner “thousand obstacles thrown in the Published account of Turner’s rebellion, written by Turner’s lawyer, Thomas way of the flying slave. Every white Gray. man’s hand is raised against ­him—​­the

 500  CHAPTER 11  The South, Slavery, and King Cotton 1800–1860

 patrollers are watching for ­him—​­the hounds are ready to follow on his track, and the nature of the country is such as renders it impossible to pass through it with any safety.” Running away meant exposing oneself to ­flogging—​­or much worse.

 the lure of freedom

 Yet stealthy and silent as fog, thousands of escaped slaves (called “fugitives”) made it to freedom in spite of the obstacles facing them. The fugitive slaves were a powerful example of the enduring lure of freedom and the extraordinary courage of those who yearn for it. On average, some 50,000 enslaved people tried to escape each year. Others ran away for short periods of time, usually to avoid being beaten by fl ­ ash-​­tempered owners or ­overseers. A house cook named Bertcha was so frightened that her owner was going to kill her that she “ran for the woods and hid there and stayed three weeks.” Frederick Douglass decided that risking death was better than staying in bondage: “I had as well be killed running as die standing.” The odds were stacked against escape, in part because most slaves could not read, had no maps, and could not use public transportation such as stagecoaches, steamboats, and railroads. Blacks, whether free or enslaved, had to have an identity pass or official emancipation papers to go anywhere on their own. Runaways, the vast majority of whom were young males, often were forced to return when they ran out of food or lost their way. Others were tracked down by bloodhounds or bounty hunters. Only about 1,000 slaves each year safely made it to freedom. Many slaveholders could not understand why any slave would run away. ­Scottish-​­born William Dunbar ordered that two of his runaways (“poor, ignorant devils”) in Mississippi be given 500 lashes and then had logs chained to their ankles. Why would they try to escape, he asked in a letter. “They are well clothed, work easy, and have all kinds of plantation produce” for free. Slaves who did not escape found other ways to resist. They often exasperated, enraged, and manipulated their owners. Some faked illness, stole or broke tools, destroyed crops or secretly slaughtered and ate livestock. Others slacked off when unsupervised. As a slave song confessed, “You may think I’m working / But I ain’t.” Yet there were constraints on such rebellious behavior, for laborers would likely eat better on a prosperous plantation than on a struggling one. And the shrewdest slaveholders knew that offering rewards was more profitable than inflicting pain.

 The ­S outh—​­A Region Apart The rapid settlement of the western territories during the first half of the nineteenth century set in motion a ferocious competition between North and South for political influence in the West. Would the new western territories

Forging a Slave Community  501


 and states be “slave” or “free”? Congressmen from the newly admitted western states would tip the delicate political balance in Washington, D.C., one way or the other, slave or free. Because of the rapidly growing profitability of ­slave-​­grown cotton, southerners exercised immense political power, both to protect the system of slavery and expand it into new lands made available by the removal of Indians, and to embed the economy of cotton into national and world markets. The aggressive efforts to expand slavery westward in the face of growing criticism from the North ignited a prolonged political controversy that would end in civil war. As the 1832 nullification controversy in South Carolina had revealed, southerners despised being told what to do by outsiders, and they especially resented the growing demands for the abolition of slavery. To cement the slave system in the culture of the South, many in the 1850s imagined every white family in the region owning slaves. “Ours is a p ­ ro-​ ­slavery form of government,” explained a Georgia newspaper editor. “For our part, we would like to see every white man in the South the owner of a family of negroes.” The recurring theme of southern politics and culture from the 1830s to the outbreak of civil war in 1861 was the region’s determination to remain a society dominated by whites who lorded over people of color. A South Carolinian asserted that “slavery with us is no ­abstraction—​­but a great and vital fact. Without it, our every comfort would be taken from us.” Protecting their right to own, transport, and sell slaves in the new western territories became the overriding focus of southern political leaders during the 1830s and after. ­Race-​­based slavery provided the South’s prosperity as well as its growing sense of ­separateness—​­and ­defensiveness—​­from the rest of the nation. Throughout the 1830s, southern state legislatures were “one and indivisible” in their efforts to preserve r­ ace-​­based slavery. They shouted defiance against northern abolitionists. Virginia’s General Assembly, for example, declared that only the southern states had the right to control slavery and that such control must be “maintained at all hazards.” The Georgia legislature agreed, announcing that “upon this point there can be no d ­ iscussion—​­no ­compromise—​­no doubt.” With each passing year, the leaders of the Old South equated the survival of their distinctive region with the preservation of slavery. As the governor of Mississippi insisted in 1850, slavery “is entwined with our political system and cannot be separated from it.” The increasingly militant efforts of northerners to restrict or abolish slavery helped reinforce southern unity while provoking an emotional defensiveness that would result in secession and w ­ ar—​­and the unexpected end of slavery and the Cotton Kingdom it enabled.

CHAPTER REVIEW
Summary • 
 Southern Distinctiveness The South remained rural and agricultural in the first half of the nineteenth century as the rest of the nation embraced urban industrial development. The region’s climate favored the growth of cash crops such as tobacco, rice, indigo, and increasingly, cotton. These crops led to the spread of the plantation system of large commercial agriculture dependent on enslaved labor. The southern planter elite not only sought to preserve slavery but to expand it, despite growing criticism of the “peculiar institution.”

•


A
Cotton Economy The Old South became increasingly committed to a cotton economy. Despite efforts to diversify the economic base, the wealth and status associated with cotton, as well as soil exhaustion and falling prices from Virginia to Georgia, prompted the westward expansion of the plantation culture to the Old Southwest. Slaves worked in harsh conditions as they prepared the terrain for cotton cultivation and experienced the breakup of their families. By 1860, the Cotton Kingdom stretched from the Carolinas and Georgia through eastern Texas and up the Mississippi River to Illinois. More than half of all slaves worked on cotton plantations. As long as cotton prices rose, southern planters searched for new land and invested in slaves to increase their cotton output. 
•


 Southern White Culture White society was divided between the planter ­elite—​ ­those who owned twenty slaves or ­more—​­and all the rest. Planters represented only around 4 percent of the white population but they exercised a disproportionately powerful political and social influence. Other whites owned a few slaves, but most owned none. A majority of whites were “plain white folk”—simple farmers who raised corn, cotton, hogs, and chickens. Southern farmers were highly mobile and willing to move west. Southern white women spent most of their time on household chores. The plantation mistress supervised her home and household slaves. Most whites were fiercely loyal to the institution of slavery. Even those who owned no slaves feared the competition they believed they would face if slaves were freed, and they enjoyed the privileged status that ­race-​­based slavery gave them.

•


 Southern Black Culture As slavery spread and the southern economy became more dependent on slave labor, the enslaved faced more regulations and restrictions on their behavior. The vast majority of southern blacks served as field hands. They had few rights and could be bought and sold at any time. Their movements were severely limited and they had no ability to defend themselves. Any violations could result in severe punishments. Most southern blacks were slaves, but a small percentage were free. Many of the free blacks were mulattoes, having m ­ ixed-​­race parentage. Free blacks often worked for wages in towns and cities.



•


 African American Resistance and Resilience Originally, slaves were treated more as indentured servants and were eligible for freedom after a specified number of years. But slave codes eventually codified the practice of treating slaves as property rather than as people. The enslaved responded in a variety of ways. Although many attempted to escape, only a few openly rebelled because the consequences were so harsh. Organized revolts such as Nat Turner’s Rebellion in Virginia were rare. Most slaves survived by relying on their own communities, family ties, and Christian faith, and by developing their own culture, such as the singing of spirituals to express frustration, sorrow, and hope for their eventual deliverance.

Chronology






 The enslaved population of the United States is almost 700,000 Slave revolt in ­Saint-​­Domingue (Haiti) Gabriel Prosser conspiracy in Richmond, Virginia U.S. participation in the international slave trade is outlawed Charles Deslondes revolt in Louisiana Annual cotton production in the United States is 150,000 bales Denmark Vesey conspiracy is discovered in Charleston, South Carolina U.S. slave population exceeds 2 million Nat Turner leads slave insurrection in Virginia Population in the Old Southwest tops 1.5 million Annual cotton production in the United States reaches 4 million bales Slave population in the United States reaches 4 million

Key Terms
 “peculiar institution” p. 466

 slave codes p. 482

Old Southwest p. 471


 mulattoes p. 483

Cotton Kingdom p. 474


 field hands p. 488

 planters p. 477

 spirituals p. 493

 plantation mistress p. 478

 Nat Turner’s Rebellion (1831) p. 499

 “plain white folk” p. 480

IJK
Go to InQuizitive to see what you’ve learned—and learn what you’ve missed—with personalized feedback along the way. 




Religion,
­Romanticism,
 and Reform 1800–1860

 The Voyage of Life: Childhood (1839–1840) In his Voyage of Life series, Thomas Cole drew upon both the religious revivalism and Romantic ideals of the period to depict the four stages of a man’s life: childhood (shown above), youth, manhood, and old age. In this painting, an infant drifts along the River of Life with his guardian angel into the fertile landscape from the dark cave, meant to be “emblematic of our earthly origin, and the mysterious Past.”

D


 uring the first half of the nineteenth century, the United States, the world’s largest republic, was a nation of contrasts. Europeans traveling in America marveled at the nation’s restless energy and expansive optimism, its commitment to democratic ideals, and its remarkable capitalist spirit. However, visitors also noticed that the dynamic young republic was experiencing growing pains as the market revolution continued to excite a lust for profits and to widen economic inequality. Sectional tensions over economic policies (such as tariffs and the regulation of banks) and increasingly heated debates over the morality and future of slavery made for a combative political scene. Unlike the nations of Europe, which were steeped in history and romance, the United States was a young society whose founding leaders had embraced the central ideas of the ­Enlightenment—​­liberty, equality, and ­reason—​­which in turn led to the American ideals of representative government and the pursuit of happiness, most vividly set forth in Thomas Jefferson’s Declaration of Independence. During the first half of the nineteenth century, new, m ­ ore-​­democratic ideals and expectations influenced religious life, literature, and the arts; ­social-​ ­reform movements grew in scope and significance as Americans sought to “perfect” their society. Politics was not the only b ­ attleground—​­religious and cultural life also experienced intense conflicts and radical new points of view. After the Revolution, Americans were as interested in gaining religious salvation as they were in exercising political rights. A righteous army of Christian evangelists democratized the path to spiritual deliverance at the same time

 focus questions 1. What major changes took place in the practice of religion in America in the early nineteenth century? What impact did these have on American society? 2. How did transcendentalism emerge in the early nineteenth century? 3. What were the origins of the major ­social-​­reform movements in the early nineteenth century? How did they influence American society and politics?

 4. How did the emergence of the ­anti-​­slavery movement impact American society and politics?



