 394  CHAPTER 9  Nationalism and Sectionalism 1815–1828

 transportation improvements in the West. Of all the issues dividing the young republic, the passions aroused by the expansion of slavery proved to be the most difficult to resolve.

A
New Nationalism  After the War of 1812, Americans experienced a wave of patriotic excitement. They had won their independence from Britain for a second time, and a postwar surge of prosperity fed a widespread sense of optimism.

 postwar nationalism

 In his first message to Congress in late 1815, President James Madison revealed how much the challenges of the war, especially the weaknesses of the armed forces and federal financing, had changed his attitudes toward the role of the federal government. Now, Madison and other leading southern Republicans, such as South Carolina’s John C. Calhoun, acted like nationalists rather than states’ rights sectionalists. They abandoned many of Thomas Jefferson’s presidential initiatives (for example, his efforts to reduce the armed forces and his opposition to the national bank) in favor of the economic nationalism developed by Federalists Alexander Hamilton and George Washington. Madison now supported a larger army and navy, a new national bank, and tariffs to protect American manufacturers from foreign competition. “The Republicans have ­out-​­Federalized Federalism,” one New Englander commented after Madison’s speech.

 the bank of the united states

 After President Madison and congressional Republicans allowed the charter for the First Bank of the United States to expire in 1811, the nation’s finances fell into a muddle. States began chartering new local banks with little or no regulation, and their banknotes (paper money) flooded the economy with different currencies of uncertain value. Imagine trying to do business on a national basis when each ­state-​­chartered bank had its own currency, which often was not accepted by other banks or in other states. In response to the growing financial turmoil, Madison urged Congress to establish the Second Bank of the United States (B.U.S.). The B.U.S. was intended primarily to support a stable national currency that would promote economic growth. With the help of powerful congressmen Henry Clay and John C. Calhoun, Congress created the new B.U.S. in 1816, which, like its predecessor, was based in Philadelphia and was chartered for twenty years. In return for issuing national currency and opening branches in every state, the bank had to handle all of the federal government’s funds without charge,

A
New Nationalism 395 

 lend the government up to $5 million upon demand, and pay the government $1.5 million. The bitter debate over the B.U.S., then and later, helped set the pattern of regional alignment for most other economic issues. Generally speaking, westerners opposed the national bank because it catered to eastern customers. The controversy over the B.U.S. was also noteworthy because of the leading roles played by the era’s greatest statesmen: John C. Calhoun of South Carolina, Henry Clay of Kentucky, and Daniel Webster of New Hampshire (and later Massachusetts). Calhoun introduced the banking bill and pushed it through, justifying its constitutionality by citing the congressional power to regulate the currency. Clay, who had long opposed a national bank, now reversed himself, arguing that new economic circumstances had made it indispensable. Webster led the opposition to the bank among the New England Federalists, who feared the growing financial power of Philadelphia. Later, Webster would return to Congress as the champion of a much stronger national ­government—​­at the same time that unexpected events would steer Calhoun away from economic nationalism and toward a defiant embrace of states’ rights, slavery, and even secession.

 a protective tariff

 The long controversy with Great Britain over shipping rights convinced most Americans of the need to develop their own manufacturing sector to end their dependence on imported British goods. Efforts to develop iron and textile industries, begun in New York and New England during the embargo of 1807, had accelerated during the War of 1812 when America did not have access to European goods. After the war ended, however, the m ­ ore-​­established British companies flooded U.S. markets with their ­less-​­expensive products, which undercut their American competitors. In response, northern manufacturers lobbied Congress for federal tariffs to protect their infant industries from what they called “unfair” British competition. Congress responded by passing the Tariff of 1816, which placed a 20 to 25 percent tax on a long list of imported goods. Tariffs benefited some regions (the Northeast) more than others (the South), thus intensifying sectional tensions and grievances. Debates over federal tariffs would dominate political debate throughout the nineteenth century, in part because they provided much of the annual federal revenue and in part because they benefited manufacturers rather than consumers. The few southerners who voted for the tariff, led by John C. Calhoun, did so because they hoped that the South might also become a manufacturing center over time. Within a few years, however, New England’s manufacturing

 396  CHAPTER 9  Nationalism and Sectionalism 1815–1828

Chicago


 Lake Mi chigan

THE NATIONAL ROAD, 1811–1838 CANADA

La


 pi sip sis

 ke

Eri


 e

Cleveland


Ri


 ve

 r

Toledo


Erie


INDIANA
Richmond 
Springfield


Vandalia
St. Louis


Springfield


Columbus


Dayton


Indianapolis
Terre Haute


Cincinnati


Vincennes


Oh




■




 NJ

Philadelphia
Wheeling


Zanesville
Lancaster


 io R r ive

Cumberland
Baltimore


MD
Washington, D.C. 
200 Miles
200 Kilometers


 DE

 VIRGINIA

 KENTUCKY

New
York


 PENNSYLVANIA

 OHIO

 ILLINOIS

Mi s


NEW YORK

 MICHIGAN

Built 1811–1818
Built 1825–1838


Chesapeake
Bay


 Why were internal improvements so important?

 WWN64 ■ How did new roads, canals, and steamships affect agriculture and trade? Figure M9_1 ■ proof What were the constitutional issues that limited the federal government’s First 31p0 ability x 17p0 to enact internal improvements?

 sector would roar ahead of the South, leading Calhoun to do an ­about-​­face and begin opposing tariffs.

 internal improvements

 The third major element of economic nationalism in the first half of the nineteenth century involved federal financing of “internal improvements”—the construction of roads, bridges, canals, and harbors. Most American rivers flowed from north to south, so the nation needed a network of roads running east to west, including what became known as the National Road connecting the Midwest with the East coast. In 1817, John C. Calhoun urged the House to fund internal improvements. He believed that a federally-funded network of roads and canals in the West would help his native South by opening up trading relationships between the two regions. Support for federally-financed roads and canals came largely from the West, which badly needed transportation infrastructure. Opposition was centered in New England, which expected to gain the least from projects intended to spur western development.

 postwar nationalism and the supreme court

The
 postwar emphasis on economic nationalism also surfaced in the Supreme

A
New Nationalism 397 

 Court, where Chief Justice John Marshall strengthened the constitutional powers of the federal government at the expense of states’ rights. In the pathbreaking case of Marbury v. Madison (1803), the Court had, for the first time, declared a federal law unconstitutional. In the cases of Martin v. Hunter’s Lessee (1816) and Cohens v. Virginia (1821), the Court ruled that the U.S. Constitution, as well as the nation’s laws and treaties, could remain the supreme law of the land only if the Court could review and at times overturn the decisions of state courts.

 protecting contract rights

 The Supreme Court made two more major decisions in 1819 that strengthened the John Marshall A pillar of judicial power of the federal government at the nationalism, Marshall was appointed expense of the states: one, Dartmouth chief justice of the U.S. Supreme Court College v. Woodward, involved the New at the age of ­forty-​­six, ruling on Marbury Hampshire legislature’s effort to change v. Madison just two years later. Dartmouth College’s charter to stop the college’s trustees from electing their own successors. In 1816, the state’s legislature created a new board of trustees for the college. The original group of trustees sued to block the move. They lost in the state courts but won on appeal to the Supreme Court. The college’s original charter, wrote John Marshall in drafting the Court’s opinion, was a valid contract that the state legislature had impaired, an act forbidden by the Constitution. This decision implied a new and enlarged definition of contract that seemed to put corporations beyond the reach of the states that had chartered them. Thereafter, states commonly wrote into the charters incorporating businesses and other organizations provisions making the charters subject to modification. Such provisions were then part of the “contract.”

 protecting a national currency

 The second major Supreme Court case of 1819 was Marshall’s most significant interpretation of the constitutional system: McCulloch v. Maryland. James McCulloch, a B.U.S. clerk in the Baltimore office, had refused to pay state taxes on B.U.S. currency, as required by a Maryland law. The state indicted McCulloch. Acting on behalf of the national bank, he appealed to the Supreme Court, which ruled

 398  CHAPTER 9  Nationalism and Sectionalism 1815–1828

 Steamboat Travel on the Hudson River (1811) This watercolor of an early steamboat was painted by a Russian diplomat, Pavel Petrovich Svinin, who was fascinated by early technological innovations and the unique culture of America.

 unanimously that Congress had the authority to charter the B.U.S. and that states had no right to tax the national bank. Speaking for the Court, Chief Justice Marshall ruled that Congress had the right (that is, one of its “implied powers”) to take any action not forbidden by the Constitution as long as the purpose of such laws was within the “scope of the Constitution.” One great principle that “entirely pervades the Constitution,” Marshall wrote, is “that the Constitution and the laws made in pursuance thereof are supreme: . . . They control the Constitution and laws of the respective states, and cannot be controlled by them.”

 regulating interstate commerce

 John Marshall’s last dramatic decision, Gibbons v. Ogden (1824), affirmed the federal government’s supremacy in regulating interstate commerce in a ruling on an impor­ tant New York case. In 1808, the New York legislature granted Robert Fulton and Robert R. Livingston the sole right to operate steamboats on the state’s rivers and lakes. Fulton and Livingston then gave Aaron Ogden the exclusive right to ferry people and goods up the Hudson River between New York and New Jersey. Thomas

 Debates over the American System  399

 Gibbons, however, operated ships under a federal license that competed with Ogden. On behalf of a unanimous Court, Marshall ruled that the monopoly granted by the state to Ogden conflicted with the federal license issued to Gibbons. Thomas Jefferson detested John Marshall’s judicial nationalism. The Court’s ruling in the Gibbons case, said the ­eighty-​­two-​­year-​­old former president, revealed how “the Federal branch of our Government is advancing towards the usurpation of all the rights reserved to the States, and the consolidation in itself of all powers, foreign and domestic.”

 Debates over the American System The major economic initiatives debated by Congress after the War of 1812— the national bank, federal tariffs, and federally-financed roads, bridges, ports, and c­ anals—​­were interrelated pieces of a comprehensive economic plan called the American System. The term was coined by Republican Henry Clay, the powerful congressional leader from Kentucky who would serve three terms as Speaker of the House before becoming a U.S. senator. Clay wanted to free America’s economy from its dependence on Great Britain while tying together the diverse regions of the nation politically. He said, “I know of no South, no North, no East, no West to which I owe my allegiance. The Union is my country.” In promoting his American System, Clay sought to give each section of the country its top economic priority. He argued that high tariffs on imports were needed to block the sale of British products in the United States and thereby protect new industries in New England and New York from unfair foreign competition. To convince the western states to support the tariffs, Clay first called for the federal government to use tariff revenues to build ­much-​­needed ­infrastructure—​­roads, bridges, canals, and other “internal improvements”— in the frontier West to enable speedier travel and faster shipment of goods to markets. Second, Clay’s American System would raise prices for federal lands sold to the public and distribute the additional revenue from the land sales to the states to help finance more roads, bridges, and canals. Third, Clay endorsed a strong national bank to create a single national currency and to regulate the often unstable state and local banks. Clay was the consummate deal maker and economic nationalist. In many respects, he assumed responsibility for sustaining Alexander Hamilton’s vision

 400  CHAPTER 9  Nationalism and Sectionalism 1815–1828

 of a strong federal government nurturing a national economy that combined agriculture, industry, and commerce. The debates over the merits of the American System would continue throughout the first half of the nineteenth century. The success of Clay’s program depended on each section’s willingness to compromise. For a while, it worked. Critics, however, argued that higher prices for federal lands would discourage western migration and that tariffs benefited the northern manufacturing sector at the expense of southern and western farmers and the “common” people, who had to pay higher prices for the goods produced by ­tariff-​­protected industries. Many westerners and southerners also feared that the Second Bank of the United States would become so powerful and corrupt that it could dictate the nation’s economic future at the expense of states’ rights and the needs of particular regions. Missouri senator Thomas Hart Benton predicted that ­cash-​­strapped western towns would be at the mercy of the national bank in Philadelphia. Westerners, Benton worried, “are in the jaws of the monster! A lump of butter in the mouth of a dog! One gulp, one swallow, and all is gone!”

“An Era of Good Feelings”
 Near the end of his presidency, James Madison turned to James Monroe, a fellow Virginian, to be his successor. In the 1816 election, Monroe overwhelmed his Federalist opponent, Rufus King of New York, by a 183–34 margin in the Electoral College. The “Virginia dynasty” of presidents continued. Monroe’s presidency started with America at peace and its economy flourishing. Soon after his inauguration, in early 1817, Monroe embarked on a goodwill tour of New England, the stronghold of the Federalist party. In Boston, a Federalist newspaper complimented the Republican president for making the effort to “harmonize feelings, annihilate dissentions, and make us one people.” Those words of praise were printed under the heading, “Era of Good Feelings,” and the headline became a popular label for Monroe’s administration.

 james monroe

Like George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, and James
 Madison, Monroe was a slaveholding planter from Virginia. At the outbreak of the Revolutionary War, he dropped out of the College of William and Mary to join the army. He served under George Washington, who called him a “brave, active, and sensible army officer.” After studying law under Thomas Jefferson, Monroe served as a representative in the Virginia assembly, as governor, as a representative in the Confederation Congress, as a U.S. senator, and as U.S. minister (ambassador) to Paris,

“An Era of Good Feelings”  401


London, and Madrid. Under President
 Madison, he served as secretary of state and doubled as secretary of war during the War of 1812. John C. Calhoun, who would be Monroe’s secretary of war, said that the new president was “among the wisest and most cautious men I have ever known.” Jefferson noted that Monroe was “a man whose soul might be turned wrong side outwards without discovering a blemish to the world.” Although Monroe’s presidency began peacefully enough, sectional loyalties eventually erupted at the expense of nationalist needs. Two major events signaled the end of the Era of Good Feelings and warned of stormy times ahead: the financial Panic of 1819 and the political conflict over statehood for Missouri.

 the panic of 1819

 James Monroe Portrayed as he began his presidency in 1817.

 The young republic experienced its first major economic depression when the Panic of 1819 led to a prolonged financial slowdown. Like so many other economic collapses, it was fundamentally the result of too many people trying to get rich too quickly. After the War of 1812, European demand for American products, especially cotton, tobacco, and flour, soared, leading farmers and planters to increase production. To fuel the roaring postwar economy, unsound local and state banks multiplied and made it ­easy—​­too ­easy—​­for people and businesses to get loans. The Bank of the United States (B.U.S.) aggravated the problem by issuing risky loans, too. At the same time, the federal government aggressively sold vast tracts of public land, which spurred reckless real estate speculation by people buying large parcels with the intention of reselling them. On top of all that, good weather in Europe led to a spike in crop production there, thus reducing the need to buy American commodities. Prices for American farm products plunged. The Panic of 1819 was ignited by the sudden collapse of cotton prices after British textile mills quit buying ­high-​­priced American ­cotton—​­the nation’s leading ­export—​­in favor of cheaper cotton from other parts of the world. As the price of cotton fell and the flow of commerce slowed, banks began to fail,

 402  CHAPTER 9  Nationalism and Sectionalism 1815–1828

 and unemployment spiked. The collapse of cotton prices was especially devastating for southern planters, but it also reduced the world demand for other American goods. Owners of new factories and mills, most of them in New England, New York, and Pennsylvania, struggled to find markets for their goods and to fend off ­more-​­experienced foreign competitors. The financial panic and the ensuing depression deepened tensions between northern and southern economic interests. It also spawned a widespread distrust of banks and bankers. Tennessee congressman David Crockett dismissed the “whole Banking system” as nothing more than “swindling on a large scale.” Thomas Jefferson felt the same way. He wrote to John Adams that “the paper [money] bubble is then burst. This is what you and I, and every reasoning man . . . have long foreseen.” Other factors caused the financial panic to become a depression. Business owners, farmers, and land speculators had recklessly borrowed money to expand their business ventures or to purchase more land. With the collapse of crop prices and the decline of land values during and after 1819, both land speculators and settlers saw their income plummet. The equally reckless lending practices of the numerous new state banks compounded the economic confusion. To generate more loans, the banks issued more paper money. Even the Second Bank of the United States, which was supposed to provide financial stability, was caught up in the ­easy-​­credit mania. In 1819, newspapers revealed a case of extensive fraud and embezzlement in the Baltimore branch of the Bank of the United States. The scandal prompted the appointment of Langdon Cheves, a former South Carolina congressman, as the new president of the B.U.S. Cheves restored confidence in the national bank by forcing state banks to keep more gold coins in their vaults to back up the loans they were making. State banks in turn put pressure on their debtors, who found it harder to renew old loans or to get new ones. The economic depression lasted about three years, and many people blamed the B.U.S. After the panic subsided, many Americans, especially in the South and the West, remained critical of the national bank.

 the missouri compromise

 As the financial panic deepened, another dark cloud appeared on the horizon: the onset of a fierce sectional controversy over expanding slavery into the western territories. The possibility of western territories becoming “slave states” created the greatest political debate of the nineteenth century. Thomas Jefferson admitted that the issue scared him “like a firebell in the night.” Jefferson realized that the United States was increasingly at risk of disintegrating over the future of slavery. By 1819, the country had an equal number

“An Era of Good Feelings”  403


 of slave and free ­states—​­eleven of each. The Northwest Ordinance (1787) had banned slavery north of the Ohio River, and the Southwest Ordinance (1790) had authorized slavery south of the Ohio. In the region west of the Mississippi River, however, slavery had existed since France and Spain first colonized the area. St. Louis became the crossroads through which southerners brought slaves into the Missouri Territory. In 1819, residents in the Missouri Territory asked the House of Representatives to let them draft a constitution and apply for statehood, its population having passed the minimum of 60,000 white settlers (there were also some 10,000 slaves). It would be the first state west of the Mississippi River. At that point, Representative James Tallmadge Jr., an obscure New York Republican, stunned Congress by proposing a resolution to ban the transport of any more slaves into Missouri. Tallmadge’s resolution enraged southern slave owners, many of whom had developed a profitable business selling slaves

THE MISSOURI COMPROMISE, 1820 BRITISH POSSESSIONS OREGON COUNTRY
Joint occupation by Britain and U.S. 
MAINE VT 1820

 ip p ss

M
 iss i

 UNORGANIZED

MICHIGAN TERRITORY

NH MA

 NY

 i

 OH

 IN o

River


 hi

 IL

SPANISH POSSESSIONS

O


 MISSOURI

 VA

SC MS

 GA

 AL

ATLANTIC OCEAN

FLORIDA TERRITORY

 Free states

■


 MD

 NC

 TN

 LA

 Slave states States and territories covered by the compromise

 RI

 KY

ARKANSAS TERRITORY

PACIFIC OCEAN

CT NJ DE

 PA

River


 TERRITORY

GULF OF MEXICO



 BRITISH

500 Miles


500 Kilometers


SP A NI

 SH

 What caused the sectional controversy over slavery in 1819?

 ■ What were the terms of the Missouri Compromise? WWN64 Figure M9_2 was Henry Clay’s solution to the Missouri constitution’s ban on free blacks in ■ What First proof that state? 31p0 x 20p6

 404  CHAPTER 9  Nationalism and Sectionalism 1815–1828

 to traders who took them to the western territories to be sold again. Any effort to restrict slavery in the western territories, they believed, could lead to “disunion” and civil war. In addition, southerners worried that the addition of Missouri as a free state would tip the balance of power in the Senate against the slave states. Their fears were heightened when Congressman Timothy Fuller, an anti-slavery Republican from Massachusetts, declared that it was both “the right and duty of Congress” to stop the spread “of the intolerable evil and the crying enormity of slavery.” After fiery debates, the House, with its northern majority, passed the Tallmadge Amendment on an almost strictly sectional vote. The Senate, however, rejected ­it—​­also along sectional lines. At about the same time, Maine, which had been part of Massachusetts, applied for statehood. The Senate decided to link Maine’s request for statehood with Missouri’s, voting in 1820 to admit Maine as a free state and Missouri as a slave state, thus maintaining the political balance between free and slave states. Illinois senator Jesse Thomas revised the ­so-​­called Missouri Compromise by introducing an amendment to exclude slavery in the rest of the Louisiana Purchase north of latitude 36°30′, Missouri’s southern border. Slavery thus would continue in the Arkansas Territory and in the new state of Missouri but would be excluded from the remainder of the area west of the Mississippi River. By a narrow margin, the Thomas Amendment passed on March 2, 1820. Then another issue arose. The p ­ ro-​ slavery faction in Missouri’s consti­ tutional convention inserted in the proposed state constitution a provision excluding free blacks and mulattoes (­mixed-​­race people) from residing in the state. This violated the U.S. Constitution. Free blacks were already citizens of many states. The dispute over the status of blacks Henry Clay of Kentucky Clay entered the Senate at t­ wenty-​­eight, despite the threatened to unravel the deal to admit requirement that senators be at least Missouri as a state until Speaker of the thirty years old. Here, Clay is pictured House Henry Clay fashioned a “secon a fi ­ fty-​­dollar bill issued in the 1860s. ond” Missouri Compromise whereby

Nationalist Diplomacy  405


 Missouri would be admitted as a state only if its legislature pledged never to deny free blacks their constitutional rights. The Missouri legislature approved Clay’s suggestion but denied that it had any power to bind the state in the future. On August 10, 1821, Missouri became the t­ wenty-​­fourth state, and the twelfth where slavery was allowed. Nationalists praised the Missouri Compromise for deflecting the volatile issue of slavery. But the compromise settled little. In fact, it had the effect of hardening positions in both North and South. Sectionalism erupted even within the president’s cabinet. President Monroe insisted that any effort to restrict the spread of slavery violated the Constitution. His secretary of state, the future president John Quincy Adams of Massachusetts, disliked the Missouri Compromise for the opposite reason: because it sustained the Constitution’s immoral “bargain between freedom and slavery.” The debate over the Missouri Compromise revealed a widening divide between North and South: the North dominated by shipping, commerce, manufacturing, and small farms, the South becoming more and more dependent on cotton and slavery.

Nationalist Diplomacy
 The efforts of Henry Clay to promote economic nationalism and John Marshall to affirm judicial nationalism were reinforced by efforts to practice diplomatic nationalism. John Quincy Adams, secretary of state in the Monroe administration and the son of former president John Adams, aggressively exercised America’s growing power to clarify and expand the nation’s boundaries. He also wanted Europeans to recognize America’s dominance in the Western Hemisphere.

 relations with britain

 The Treaty of Ghent (1814) had ended the War of 1812, but it left unsettled several disputes between the United States and Great Britain. Adams oversaw the negotiations of two important treaties, the ­Rush-​­Bagot Treaty of 1817 (named after the diplomats who arranged it) and the Convention of 1818, both of which eased tensions. In the R ­ ush-​­Bagot Treaty, the two nations agreed to limit the number of warships on the Great Lakes. The Convention of 1818 was even more impor­ tant. It settled the disputed northern boundary of the Louisiana Purchase by extending it along the 49th parallel westward, from what would become Minnesota to the Rocky Mountains. West of the Rockies, the Oregon Country would be jointly occupied by the British and the Americans.

 406  CHAPTER 9  Nationalism and Sectionalism 1815–1828

BOUNDARY TREATIES, 1818–1819 OREGON COUNTRY
Joint occupation by Britain and U.S., 
Convent


BRITISH POSSESSIONS

 ion of 1818

Lake of
 the Woods

 49th parallel

 ip p ss

M
 iss i

River


TERRITORIES A
rk a 
 UNITED nsas R

 STATES

 iver

SPANISH PACIFIC OCEAN

 i

U. S.
 42nd parallel

 POSSESSIONS

Adams-Onis
Treaty Line,


R ed


Nashville


R iv e r
Sab
 in ive eR r

Pensacola


GULF OF MEXICO



St.
Marks


FLORIDA
Ceded by Spain to U.S., 1819 
ATLANTIC OCEAN
St. Augustine 
 BRITISH

500 Miles


500 Kilometers


SPANI S

H


 ■ How did the Convention of 1818 settle boundary disputes between Spain and WWN64 United States? Figurethe M9_3 First■proof How did Andrew Jackson’s aggressive military actions in Florida help John 31p0 xQuincy 20p6 Adams claim territory from Spain?

 florida

 Still another disputed boundary involved western Florida. Spanish control over Florida during the early nineteenth century was more a technicality than an actuality. Spain was now a declining power, unable to enforce its obligations under Pinckney’s Treaty of 1795 to keep Indians in the region from making raids into south Georgia. In 1816, U.S. soldiers clashed with runaway slaves holed up in a British fort in West Florida, in the ­present-​­day Florida Panhandle. At the same time, Seminole warriors fought white settlers in the area. In 1817, Americans burned a Seminole village on the border, killing five Indians. At that point, Secretary of War John C. Calhoun ordered General Andrew Jackson to lead an army from Tennessee into Florida, igniting what became known as the First Seminole War. Jackson was told to pursue marauding Indians into Spanish Florida but not to attack Spanish forts. Jackson, frustrated by the restrictions, wrote President Monroe that if the United States wanted Spanish Florida, he could conquer it in sixty days.

Nationalist Diplomacy  407


Massacre of the Whites by Indians and Blacks in Florida (1836) Published in a
 southerner’s account of the Seminole War, this is one of the earliest known depictions of African Americans and Native Americans fighting as allies.

 In early 1818, Jackson’s force of 2,000 federal soldiers, volunteer Tennessee militiamen, and Indian allies crossed into Spanish Florida from their encampment in south Georgia. In April, the Americans assaulted a Spanish fort at St. Marks and destroyed several Seminole villages along the Suwannee River, hanging two chiefs. Jackson’s soldiers also captured and c­ ourt-​­martialed two British traders accused of provoking Indian attacks. When told that a military trial of the British citizens was illegal, Jackson gruffly replied that the laws of war did not “apply to conflicts with savages.” Jackson ordered the immediate execution of the British troublemakers, an illegal action that outraged the British government and alarmed President Monroe’s cabinet. But the Tennessee general kept moving. In May, he captured Pensacola, the Spanish capital of West Florida, and established a provisional American government until Florida’s future was decided. While Jackson’s conquests excited expansionists, they aroused anger in Spain and concern in Washington, D.C. Spain demanded that its territory be returned and that Jackson be punished for violating international law. Monroe’s cabinet was at first prepared to disavow Jackson’s illegal acts. Privately, Secretary of War Calhoun criticized Jackson for disobeying o ­ rders—​­a stand that would later cause bad blood between them. Jackson, however, was a hero to most Americans. He also had an impor­ tant friend in the ­cabinet—​­Secretary of State John Quincy Adams, who realized that Jackson’s unauthorized conquest of Florida had strengthened his own hand in negotiating with the Spanish to purchase the territory. American forces withdrew from Florida, but negotiations resumed with the knowledge that the U.S. Army could retake Florida at any time.

 408  CHAPTER 9  Nationalism and Sectionalism 1815–1828

 In 1819, Adams convinced the Spanish to sign the Transcontinental Treaty (also called the ­Adams-​­Onís Treaty), which gave all of Florida to the United States for $5 million. In 1821, Florida became a U.S. territory; in 1845, it would become a state. The treaty also clarified the western boundary separating the Louisiana Territory from New Spain. It would run from the Gulf of Mexico north along the Sabine River separating Louisiana from Texas and then in s­ tair-​­step fashion up to the Red River, along the Red, and up to the Arkansas River. From the source of the Arkansas River, it would go north to the 42nd parallel and then west to the Pacific coast. The United States finally The controversial spanned the continent.

Andrew Jackson
 general was painted by Anna Claypoole Peale in 1819, the year of his military exploits in Florida. She captured Jackson’s confident demeanor that made him so popular.

 the monroe doctrine

The
 most important diplomatic policy crafted by President Monroe and Secretary of State Adams involved a determined effort to prevent any future European colonialism in the Western Hemisphere. The Spanish, British, French, Portuguese, Dutch, and Russians still controlled one or more colonies in the Americas. One consequence of the Napoleonic Wars in Europe was the French occupation of Spain and Portugal. The turmoil in those two conquered nations helped trigger independence movements among their colonies in the Americas. Within little more than a decade after the flag of rebellion was first raised in 1809 in Ecuador, Spain had lost almost its entire empire in the Americas: La Plata (later Argentina), Bolivia, Chile, Ecuador, Peru, Colombia, Mexico, Paraguay, Uruguay, and Venezuela had all proclaimed their independence, as had Portuguese Brazil. The only areas still under Spanish control were the islands of Cuba and Puerto Rico and the colony of Santo Domingo on the island of Hispaniola. In 1823, rumors reached America that the monarchs of Europe were planning to help Spain recover its Latin American colonies. The British foreign minister, George Canning, told the United States that the two countries should

The Rise of Andrew Jackson  409


 jointly oppose any new incursions by European nations in the Western Hemisphere. Monroe initially ­agreed—​­if the London government would agree to recognize the independence of the new nations of Latin America. The British refused. Adams, however, advised Monroe to go it alone in prohibiting further European involvement in the hemisphere. Adams stressed that “it would be more candid as well as more dignified” for America to ban further European intervention than to tag along with a British statement. Monroe agreed. In his annual message to Congress in December 1823, the president outlined the four major points of what became known as the Monroe Doctrine: (1) that “the American continents . . . are henceforth not to be considered as subjects for future colonization by any European powers”; (2) that the United States would consider any attempt by a European nation to intervene “in this hemisphere as dangerous to our peace and safety”; (3) that the United States would not interfere with existing ­European-​­controlled colonies in the Americas; and (4) that the United States would keep out of the internal affairs of European nations. Reaction to the Monroe Doctrine was mixed. In France, Marquis de ­Lafayette, the courageous ­freedom-​­loving volunteer in the American Revolution, hailed the new policy “as the best little bit of paper that God had ever permitted any man to give to the world.” Others were not as impressed by the “presumptuous” American declaration. No European nation recognized the Monroe Doctrine. In fact, the Russian ruler, Czar Alexander I, dismissed it with “profound contempt,” since he knew that the tiny U.S. Navy could not protect its shores. The Russians then controlled Alaska and claimed to own the Oregon Country as well. To this day, the Monroe Doctrine has no official standing in international law. Symbolically, however, it has been an important statement of American intentions to prevent European involvement in the Western Hemisphere and an example of the young nation’s determination to take its place among the world’s great powers. Since it was announced, not a single Latin American nation has lost its independence to an outside invader.

The Rise of Andrew Jackson
 After the War of 1812, the United States had become a o ­ ne-​­party political system. The refusal of the Federalists to support the war had virtually killed the party. In 1820, President Monroe was reelected without opposition; the Federalists did not even nominate a candidate.

 410  CHAPTER 9  Nationalism and Sectionalism 1815–1828

 While the Republican party was dominant for the moment, however, it was about to follow the Federalists into oblivion. If Monroe’s first term was the Era of Good Feelings, his second term became an Era of Bad Feelings, as sectional controversies erupted into disputes so violent that they gave birth to a new political party, the Democrats, led by Andrew Jackson.

 andrew jackson

 Born in 1767 along the border between the two Carolinas, Jackson grew up in a struggling ­single-​­parent household. His father was killed in a farm accident three weeks before Andrew was born, forcing his widowed mother Elizabeth to scratch out a living as a housekeeper, while raising three sons. During the Revolution, the Jackson boys joined in the fighting against the British. One of them, s­ ixteen-​­year-​­old Hugh, died of heat exhaustion during a battle; another, Robert, died while trudging home from a ­prisoner-​­of-​­war camp. In 1781, f­ourteen-​­year-​­old Andrew was captured. When a British officer demanded that the boy shine his muddy boots, Andrew refused, explaining that he was a prisoner of war and expected “to be treated as such,” whereupon the angry officer slashed him with his sword, leaving ugly scars on Jackson’s head and hand. Soon after her son was released, Elizabeth Jackson, who had helped nurse injured American soldiers, died of cholera. The orphaned Andrew Jackson thereafter despised the British, blaming them for the deaths of his brothers and mother. After the Revolution, the s­elf-​­taught Jackson went to Charleston, South Carolina, where he quickly learned to love racehorses, gambling, and fine clothes. He returned home and tried saddle making and teaching before moving to Salisbury, North Carolina, where he earned a license to practice law. He was so combative an attorney that he challenged an opposing lawyer to a duel. He also enjoyed life. A friend recalled that young Jackson was “the most roaring, rollicking, g­ ame-​­cocking, ­card-​­playing, mischievous fellow that ever lived in Salisbury.” In 1788, at age ­twenty-​­one, Jackson moved to Nashville where he became a frontier attorney in backwoods Tennessee. He also fell in love with Rachel Donelson Robards, a beautiful and lively married woman with whom he lived before she was legally divorced from her first husband. The Jacksons were passionately devoted to each other, but ­mean-​­spirited gossip about the origins of their relationship dogged them until Rachel’s death in December 1828. Throughout his life, Jackson had a quick temper. He loved a good fight. “When danger rears its head,” he once told his wife, “I can never shrink from it.” In 1806, he challenged Charles Dickinson to a duel, claiming that Dickinson had not paid off a racing bet and had insulted his wife, Rachel. Although

The Rise of Andrew Jackson  411


 Dickinson was said to be the best shot in Tennessee, Jackson let him fire first. For his gallantry, the future president received a bullet in his chest that nearly killed him. He nevertheless straightened himself, patiently took aim, and coolly killed his foe. “I should have hit him,” Jackson claimed, “if he had shot me through the brain.” (The bullet in his chest was never removed.) In 1796, when Tennessee became a state, voters elected Jackson to the U.S. House and later to the Senate, where he served only a year before returning to Tennessee and becoming a judge. The ambitious Jackson made a lot of money, first as an attorney, then as a buyer and seller of horses, land, and slaves. He eventually owned 100 slaves on his large cotton plantation, called the Hermitage. He had no moral reservations about slavery and at times could be a cruel master. After one of his slaves escaped, Jackson offered a large reward for his recapture, and promised “ten dollars extra for every hundred lashes a person will give [him] to the amount of three hundred.” When not farming or raising racehorses, Jackson served as the ­iron-​­willed commander of the Tennessee militia. Many American political leaders cringed at the thought of the r­ough-​ ­hewn, s­hort-​­tempered Jackson, who had run roughshod over international law in his war against the British and Seminoles in Florida, presiding over the nation. “His passions are terrible,” said Thomas Jefferson. John Quincy Adams scorned Jackson “as a barbarian and savage who could scarcely spell his name.” Jackson dismissed such criticism as an example of the “Eastern elite” trying to maintain control of American politics. He responded to Adams’s criticism of his literacy by commenting that he never trusted a man who could think of only one way to spell a word.

 presidential politics

 No sooner had James Monroe started his second presidential term, in 1821, than leading Republicans began positioning themselves to be the next president, including three members of the president’s cabinet: Secretary of War John C. Calhoun, Secretary of the Treasury William H. Crawford, and Secretary of State John Quincy Adams. The powerful speaker of the House, Henry Clay, also hungered for the presidency. And there was Andrew Jackson, who was elected to the Senate in 1823. The emergence of so many viable candidates revealed how fractured the Republican party had become. In 1822, the Tennessee legislature named Jackson its l­ong-​­shot choice to succeed Monroe. Two years later, Pennsylvania Republicans also endorsed Jackson for president and chose Calhoun for vice president. Meanwhile, the Kentucky legislature had nominated its favorite son, Clay, in 1822. The Massachusetts legislature nominated Adams in 1824. That same year, a group of Republican congressmen nominated Crawford, a cotton planter from Georgia.

 412  CHAPTER 9  Nationalism and Sectionalism 1815–1828

 Crawford’s friends emphasized his devotion to states’ rights and strict construction of the Constitution. Clay continued to promote the economic nationalism of his American System. Adams, the only ­non-​­slaveholder in the race, shared Clay’s belief that the national government should finance internal improvements to stimulate economic development, but he was less strongly committed to tariffs. Jackson declared himself the champion of the common people and the foe of the entrenched social and political elite. He claimed to represent the “old republicanism” of Thomas Jefferson. But Jefferson believed that Jackson lacked the education, polish, and prudence to be president. “He is,” Jefferson told a friend, “one of the most unfit men I know,” a “dangerous man.” In 1824, Jefferson supported Crawford. As a ­self-​­made military hero, Jackson was an attractive candidate, especially to voters of Irish background. The son of poor ­Scots-​­Irish colonists, he was beloved for having defeated the hated English in the Battle of New ­Orleans. In addition, his commitment to those he called the “common men” resonated with many Irish immigrants who associated aristocracy with centuries of English rule over Ireland.

 the “corrupt bargain”

 The initial results of the 1824 presidential election were inconclusive. Jackson won the popular vote and the Electoral College, where he had 99 votes, Adams 84, Crawford 41, and Clay 37. But

 The presidential “race” of 1824 John Quincy Adams, William Crawford, and Andrew Jackson stride to the finish line (on the left) as Henry Clay lags behind (far right).

The Rise of Andrew Jackson  413


 Jackson did not have the necessary majority of electoral votes. In such a circumstance, as in the 1800 election, the Constitution specified that the House of Representatives would make the final decision from among the top three ­vote-​ ­getters. By the time the House could convene, however, Crawford had suffered a stroke and was ruled out for medical reasons. So the election came down to Adams and Jackson. Clay’s influence, as Speaker of the House, would be decisive. While Adams and Jackson courted Clay’s support, he scorned them both, claiming they provided only a “choice of evils.” But he regarded Jackson, his fierce western rival, as a “military chieftain,” a frontier Napoléon unfit for the presidency. Jackson’s election, Clay predicted, would “be the greatest misfortune that could befall the country.” Although Clay and Adams disliked each other, the nationalist Adams supported most of the policies that Clay wanted, particularly high tariffs, transportation improvements, and a strong national bank. Clay also expected Adams to name him secretary of state, the office that usually led to the White House. In the end, a deal between Clay and Adams broke the deadlock. Clay endorsed Adams, and the House of Representatives elected Adams with 13 state delegation votes to Jackson’s 7 and Crawford’s 4. The controversial victory proved costly for Adams, however, as it united his foes and crippled his administration before it began. Clay’s scheme proved to be a colossal blunder. Jackson dismissed Clay as a “scoundrel,” the “Judas of the West,” who had entered into a ­self-​­serving “corrupt bargain” with Adams. Their “corruptions and intrigues,” he charged, had “defeated the will of the People.” American politics had now entered an Era of Bad Feelings. Almost immediately after the 1824 decision, Jackson’s supporters launched a campaign to undermine the Adams administration and elect the military hero president in 1828. Crawford’s supporters soon moved into the Jackson camp, as did the new vice president, John C. Calhoun of South Carolina, who quickly found himself at odds with the president.

 john quincy adams

John Quincy Adams of Massachusetts was one
 of the nation’s hardest working presidents, yet he was also one of the most ineffective. Like his father, the stiff, formal Adams was a great and good man of colossal learning and steely ambition, but he lacked the common touch and the politician’s gift for compromise. He worried, as had his father, that republicanism was rapidly turning into democracy, and that government of the people was degenerating into government by the people, many of whom, in his view, were uneducated and incompetent. Adams detested the democratic politicking that Andrew Jackson represented. He still wanted politics to be a “sacred” arena for the “best men,” a

 414  CHAPTER 9  Nationalism and Sectionalism 1815–1828

 ­rofession limited to the “most able p and worthy” leaders who were motivated by a sense of civic duty rather than a selfish quest for power and stature. The poet Walt Whitman wrote that although Adams was “a virtuous m ­ an—​ ­a learned man . . . he was not a man of the People.” Adams also suffered from bouts of depression and ­self-​­pity, qualities that did not endear him to fellow politicians or the public. In a fit of candor, he described himself as “a man of reserved, cold, austere, and forbidding manners.” Yet after admitting the “defects” in his personality, Adams confessed that he could not change them. Adams’s first message to Congress, John Quincy Adams A brilliant man in December 1825, revealed his grand but an ineffective leader, he appears blueprint for national development. here in his study in 1843. He was the His vision of an energetic federal govfirst U.S. president to be photographed. ernment funding an array of improvement projects outdid the plans of Alexander Hamilton, James Monroe, and Henry Clay. The federal government, Adams stressed, should finance internal improvements (roads, canals, harbors, and bridges), create a great national university in Washington, D.C., support scientific explorations, build astronomical ­observatories, and establish a Department of the Interior to manage the vast federal lands. He challenged Congress to approve his proposals and not be paralyzed “by the will of our constituents.” Adams believed that he knew what was best for the country, and he would not be stopped by the concerns of voters. The voters thought otherwise. Reaction to Adams’s speech was overwhelmingly negative. Newspapers charged that Adams was behaving like an aristocratic tyrant, and Congress quickly revealed that it would approve none of his ambitious proposals. The disastrous start shattered Adams’s confidence. He wrote in his diary that he was in a “protracted agony of character and reputation.” Adams’s effort to expand the powers of the federal government was so controversial and divisive that the Republican party split in two, creating a new

The Rise of Andrew Jackson  415


 party system. Those who agreed with the economic nationalism of Adams and Clay began calling themselves National Republicans. The ­ opposition—​­ made up of those who supported Andrew Jackson and states’ ­rights—​­began calling themselves Democrats. They were strongest in the South and West, as well as among the working class in large eastern cities. The Democrats were the first party in America to recruit professional state organizers, such as Martin Van Buren of New York, who developed sophisticated strategies for mobilizing voters and orchestrating grassroots campaigns featuring massive rallies, barbecues, and parades. Perhaps most important, the Democrats convinced voters that their primary allegiance should be to their party rather than to any particular candidate. Party loyalty became the prized virtue among Democrats; it was the most powerful weapon they could muster against the “privileged aristocracy” running the state and federal governments. Jackson claimed that Adams was behaving like a monarch rather than a president (a charge later applied to Jackson). If the president’s schemes for expanding government power were not stopped “by the voice of the people,” Jackson said, “it must end in consolidation & then in despotism.” Adams’s opponents sought to use the always controversial tariff issue against him. In 1828, a­ nti-​­Adams congressmen introduced a new tariff bill designed to help elect Andrew Jackson. It placed duties (taxes) on various imported raw materials such as wool, hemp, and iron that were also produced in key states where Jackson needed support: Pennsylvania, New York, Ohio, Kentucky, and Missouri. The measure passed, only to be condemned as the “Tariff of Abominations” by the cotton states of the Lower South. In South Carolina, John C. Calhoun wrote the South Carolina Exposition and Protest (1828), in which he ominously declared that a state could nullify an act of Congress that it found unconstitutional, such as the new tariff.

 jackson’s election

 These maneuverings launched the savage election of 1828 between John Quincy Adams and Andrew Jackson, the National Republicans versus the Jacksonian Democrats. Both sides engaged in vicious personal attacks. As a Jackson supporter observed, “The floodgates of falsehood, slander, and abuse have been hoisted” by the Adams campaign, “and the most nauseating filth is [being] poured” on Jackson’s head. Adams’s supporters denounced Jackson as a ­hot-​­tempered, ignorant barbarian, a gambler and slave trader who thrived on confrontation and violence, and whose fame rested upon his reputation as a ­cold-​­blooded killer.

 416  CHAPTER 9  Nationalism and Sectionalism 1815–1828

 The most scurrilous attack on Jackson was that he had lived in adultery with his wife, Rachel. In fact, they had lived together as husband and wife for two years in the mistaken belief that the divorce from her first husband was final. As soon as the divorce was indeed official, Andrew and Rachel had remarried to end all doubts about their status. A furious Jackson blamed Henry Clay for the slurs against his wife, calling the Kentuckian “the basest, meanest scoundrel that ever disgraced the image of his god.” The Jacksonians, for their part, condemned Adams as an aristocrat and monarchist, a professional politician who had never had a real job. Newspa-

 “Jackson Forever” Proclaiming Andrew Jackson a “man of the people,” this 1828 poster identifies him with the democratic impulse of the time.

The Rise of Andrew Jackson  417


 pers claimed that the president had been corrupted by foreigners in the courts of Europe during his diplomatic career. The most outlandish charge was that Adams had allegedly delivered up an American girl to Czar Alexander I while serving as ambassador to Russia. Adams was left to gripe about the many “forgeries now swarming in the newspapers against me.” As a military hero and fabled Indian fighter, Jackson was beloved as the “people’s champion” by farmers and working men. As a planter, lawyer, and slaveholder, he had the trust of the southern political elite. Jackson was for a small federal government, individual liberty, an expanded military, and white supremacy. Above all, he was a nationalist committed to preserving the Union in the face of rising sectional tensions. Candidate Jackson benefited from a growing spirit of democracy in which many viewed Adams as an elitist. Jackson insisted that the election came down to one question: “Shall the government or the people rule?” As president, Jackson promised, he would fight against the entrenched power of the wealthy and powerful. When Adams’s supporters began referring to Jackson as a “jackass,” Old Hickory embraced the name, using the animal as a symbol for his “tough” campaign. The jackass eventually became the enduring symbol of the Democratic party.

 the “common man” in politics

 Jackson’s campaign explicitly appealed to the common voters, many of whom were able to vote in a presidential election for the first time as a result of the ongoing democratization of the political system. New Jersey in 1807 and Maryland and South Carolina in 1810 had abolished property and taxpaying requirements for voting, and after 1815 the new states of Indiana, Illinois, Alabama, and Mississippi gave voting rights (suffrage) to all white men regardless of how much property they owned. Other states followed, and by 1824, ­twenty-​­one of the ­twenty-​­four states had dropped ­property-​­owning requirements for voting. Only Virginia and the Carolinas, still dominated by the planter elite, continued to resist the democratizing trend. The “democratization” of politics also affected many free black males in northern states, half of which allowed blacks to vote. Rufus King, the former presidential candidate, declared that in New York, “a citizen of color was entitled to all the privileges of a citizen . . . [and] entitled to vote.” The extension of voting rights to common men led to the election of politicians sprung from “the people” rather than from the social elite. Jackson, a frontiersman of humble origin and limited education who had scrambled up the political ladder by sheer tenacity, perfectly symbolized this emerging democratic ideal.

 418  CHAPTER 9  Nationalism and Sectionalism 1815–1828

THE ELECTION OF 1828

 NH 8 VT 7

OREGON COUNTRY

NY DR 20 NR 16

MICHIGAN TERRITORY UNORGANIZED TERRITORY IL

 MO

 IN

 LA

 PA

 OH

 VA

 KY 14

 NC

 TN 11

AR TERR. MS

ME NR 8 DR 1

 AL

 GA

 MA 15 RI 4 CT 8 NJ 8 DE 3 MD NR 6 DR 5

 SC

FLORIDA TERRITORY

■


Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


Andrew Jackson (Democratic Republican)




647,000


John Quincy Adams (National Republican)




509,000


 How did the two presidential candidates, John Quincy Adams and Andrew Jackson, portray each other in the campaign?

 WWN64 ■ Why Figure M9_4did Jackson seem to have the advantage in the election of 1828? How did the broadening of voting rights affect the presidential campaign? First■ proof 31p0 x 25p0

 labor politics

 With the widespread removal of property qualifications for voting, the working class (laborers paid hourly wages) became an important political force in the form of the Working Men’s parties. They were first organized in 1828 in Philadelphia, the nation’s largest manufacturing center, with other parties following in New York City and Boston. The Working Men’s parties were devoted to promoting the interests of laborers, such as shorter working hours and allowing all males to vote regardless of the amount of property owned. But the overarching concern of the Working Men’s parties was the widening inequality of wealth in American society.

The Rise of Andrew Jackson  419


 In 1827, during a citywide carpenter’s strike, the union claimed that when business owners began to “oppress” the working class, wage laborers had no choice but to organize to protect their interests against “an unequal and very excessive accumulation of wealth and power into the hands of a few.” The Working Men’s parties faded quickly, however. The inexperience of labor politicians left them vulnerable to manipulation by political professionals. In addition, major national parties, especially the Jacksonian Democrats, ­co-​­opted many of their issues. Labor parties also proved vulnerable to charges of social radicalism, and the courts typically sided with management in dealing with strikes. Yet the ­working-​­class parties succeeded in drawing attention to their demands. They promoted free public education for all children and the abolition of imprisonment for debt, causes that won widespread popular support. The labor parties and unions also called for a t­en-​­hour workday to prevent employers from abusing workers. In large part because of Andrew Jackson’s background as a “common man,” union members loved him, and the new Democratic party proved adept at building a national coalition of ­working-​ ­class supporters.

 president jackson

 When the 1828 election returns came in, Jackson had won the electoral vote by 178 to 83, and his 56 percent of the popular vote would be a margin unsurpassed during the nineteenth century. Equally important was the surge in voter turnout; more than twice as many men voted as in the 1824 election. Jackson won every state west and south of Pennsylvania. As he prepared for his inauguration, the p ­ resident-​­elect was still boiling with resentment at the way his opponents had besmirched the reputation of his wife, who had died in ­mid-​­December 1828, just a few days after learning of the political attacks on her and her “tarnished” marriage. Jackson became obsessed with punishing her persecutors, especially his archenemy, Henry Clay. More important, Jackson wanted to launch a new democratic era that would silence his critics, restore government to “the people,” and take power away from the Eastern “elite.” He trusted the people because he was one of them. Now he would be the “people’s president.” As he headed for Washington, D.C., he was intent on transforming the nation’s political ­landscape—​­for good and for ill, as it turned out.

CHAPTER REVIEW
Summary • 
 Nationalism After the War of 1812, the federal government pursued many policies to strengthen the national economy. The Tariff of 1816 protected American manufacturing, and the Second Bank of the United States provided a stronger currency. Led by John Marshall, the Supreme Court limited the powers of states and strengthened the power of the federal government in Dartmouth College v. Woodward and McCulloch v. Maryland. The Marshall court interpreted the Constitution as giving Congress the right to take any action not forbidden by the Constitution as long as the purpose of such laws was within the “scope of the Constitution.” In Gibbons v. Ogden, the Court protected contract rights against state action and established the federal government’s supremacy over interstate commerce, thereby promoting growth of the national economy.

•


 Sectionalism Henry Clay’s American System supported economic nationalism by endorsing a national bank, a protective tariff, and federally-funded internal improvements such as roads and canals. Many Americans, however, were more tied to the needs of their particular sections of the country. People in the different ­regions—​­North, South, and West—disagreed about which economic policies best served their interests. As settlers streamed west, the extension of slavery into the new territories became the predominant political concern, eventually requiring both sides to compromise repeatedly to avoid civil war.

•


 Era of Good Feelings James Monroe’s term in office began with peace and prosperity and was initially labeled the Era of Good Feelings. Two major events, however, ended the Era of Good Feelings: the financial Panic of 1819 and the Missouri Compromise (1820). The explosive growth of the cotton culture transformed life in the South, in part by encouraging the expansion of slavery, which moved west with southern planters. But in 1819, the sudden collapse of world cotton prices devastated the southern economy and soon affected the national economy as well. The Missouri Compromise, a ­short-​­term solution to the issue of allowing slavery in the western territories, exposed the emotions and turmoil that the problem generated.

•


 National Diplomacy The main diplomatic achievements of the period between the end of the War of 1812 and the coming Civil War concerned the extension of America’s contested boundaries and the resumption of trade with its old enemy, Great Britain. The countries reached agreement on the northern U.S. borders, and to the south, the Transcontinental Treaty (­Adams-​­Onís Treaty) with Spain extended the boundaries of the United States. The Monroe Doctrine expressed the idea that the Americas were no longer open to colonization and proclaimed American neutrality in European affairs.

•


 The Election of 1828 The demise of the Federalists left the Republicans as the only political party in the nation. The Republicans’ seeming unity was shattered by



 the election of 1824, which Andrew Jackson lost as a result of what he believed was a “corrupt bargain” between John Quincy Adams and Henry Clay. Jackson won the presidency in the election of 1828 by rallying southern and western voters with his appeal to the common man. His election opened a new era in national politics.

Chronology
 Second Bank of the United States is established First protective tariff goes into effect 1817	­Rush-​­Bagot Treaty between the United States and Great Britain The Convention of 1818 establishes the northern border of the Louisiana Purchase at the 49th parallel Panic of 1819 Supreme Court issues McCulloch v. Maryland decision United States and Spain agree to the Transcontinental (­Adams-​­Onís) Treaty Congress accepts the Missouri Compromise Maine and Missouri become states Florida becomes a territory President Monroe announces the Monroe Doctrine Supreme Court issues Gibbons v. Ogden decision John Quincy Adams wins the presidential election by what some claim is a “corrupt bargain” with Henry Clay Andrew Jackson wins presidency

Key Terms
Second Bank of the United States
(B.U.S.) p. 394


American System p. 399


Tariff of 1816 p. 395


Missouri Compromise p. 404


 internal improvements p. 396 Dartmouth College v. Woodward p. 397 McCulloch v. Maryland p. 397 Gibbons v. Ogden p. 398

Panic of 1819 p. 401
Transcontinental Treaty (­Adams-​
 ­Onís Treaty) p. 408 Monroe Doctrine p. 409 “corrupt bargain” p. 413 election of 1828 p. 415

IJK
Go to InQuizitive to see what you’ve learned—and learn what you’ve missed—with personalized feedback along the way. 




The Jacksonian
Era
1828–1840


 Hard times in the Jacksonian era Although Andrew Jackson championed the “poor and humble,” his economic policies contributed to the Panic of 1837, a financial crisis that hit the working poor the hardest. This cartoon illustrates New York City during the ­seven-​­year depression: a frantic mob storms a bank, while in the foreground, a widow begs on the street with her child, surrounded by a banker or landlord and a barefoot sailor. At left, there is a drunken member of the Bowery Toughs gang and a ­down-​­on-​ h ­ is-​­luck militiaman. The cartoonist places the blame on Jackson, whose hat, glasses, and pipe overlook the scene. The white flag at left wryly states: “July 4, 1837, 61st Anniversary of Our Independence.”

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 422

24/10/15 1:51 PM


A


 ndrew Jackson was a unique personality and a transformational leader. He was the first president from a western state (Tennessee), the first to have been born in a log cabin, the first not to have come from a prominent colonial family, the last to have participated in the Revolutionary War, and the first to carry two bullets in his body from a duel and a barroom brawl. Most important, Jackson was the p ­ lain-​­spoken, polarizing emblem of a new democratic era. Born poor, orphaned early, and largely s­ elf-​­educated, Jackson never discarded his backwoods personality and rural ways. He was s­ hort-​­tempered and ­thin-​­skinned, proud and insecure. If his prickly sense of manly honor were challenged or his authority questioned, he never hesitated to fight or get even. For Jackson, politics was personal and visceral, which helps explain why his actions and policies were at times contradictory. Jackson believed in ­plain-​­speaking and plain pleasures. He smoked a corncob pipe and c­ hewed—​­and ­spit—​­tobacco (he installed twenty spittoons in the White House). Tall and lean, Jackson was an intimidating figure with his penetrating blue eyes, long nose, jutting chin, ­silver-​­gray hair, and intense, ­iron-​­willed personality. “Old Hickory,” however, was not in good health as ­ ullet-​­ridden, he was plagued by he assumed the presidency. Scarred and b blinding headaches and other ailments that led rival Henry Clay to describe him as “feeble in body and mind.” Despite his physical challenges, Jackson remained sharply focused and shrewdly sure of himself. More than previous presidents, he loved the

 focus questions 1. What were Andrew Jackson’s major beliefs regarding the common man, the presidency, and the proper role of government in the nation’s economy? 2. What was Jackson’s legacy regarding the status of Indians in American society?

 3. How did Jackson respond to the nullification crisis? 4. What brought about the economic depression of the late 1830s and the emergence of the Whig party?

 5. What were the strengths and weaknesses of Jackson’s transformational presidency?



 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 423

24/10/15 1:51 PM


