 424  CHAPTER 10  The Jacksonian Era 1828–1840

 r­ ough-​­and-​­tumble combat of the raucous new democratic political culture. “I was born for a storm,” he once boasted. “A calm [life] does not suit me.” And Jackson took the nation by storm. No political figure was so widely loved or more deeply despised. As a ­self-​­made soldier, lawyer, planter, and politician, Jackson helped create and shape the Democratic party, and he helped introduce modern presidential campaigning to electoral politics. Jackson symbolized what he called the emergence of the “common man” in politics (by which he meant white men only), and he stamped his name and, more impor­ tant, his ideas, personality, and values on an entire era of American history.

Jacksonian Democracy
 Jackson’s election marked the impact of thirty years of democratic innovations in politics. During the 1820s and 1830s, as America grew in population and people continued to move westward in ever larger numbers, most white men, whether they owned property or not, were allowed to vote and hold office. “The principle of universal suffrage,” announced the U.S. Magazine and Democratic Review, “meant that white males of age constituted the political nation.” Such a democratization of voting rights was unique in the world, for it gave previously excluded white men equal status as citizens regardless of wealth or background. No longer was politics the arena for only the most prominent and wealthiest Americans.

 political democracy

 Campaigning was also democratized. Politics became the most popular form of mass entertainment, as people from all walks of life passionately engaged in elections and were remarkably well informed about public policy issues. Politics was “the only pleasure an American knows,” observed visiting Frenchman Alexis de Tocqueville. “Even the women frequently attend public meetings and listen to political harangues as a recreation from their household labors.” Jackson was the most openly partisan and politically involved president in history to that point. Unlike previous presidents, who viewed political campaigning as unseemly, he actively sought votes among the people, lobbied congressmen, and formed “Hickory Clubs” across the nation to campaign for him. Jackson also benefited from a powerful Democratic party “machine” run by his trusted secretary of state (later his vice president), Martin Van Buren, a New York lawyer with a shrewd political sense. Democracy, of course, is a slippery and elastic concept, and Jacksonians rarely defined what they meant by the “rule of the people.” Noah Webster, the

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 424

24/10/15 1:51 PM


Jacksonian Democracy  425


 Connecticut Federalist who produced the nation’s first reliable dictionary, complained that “the men who have preached these doctrines [of democracy] have never defined what they mean by the people, or what they mean by democracy, nor how the people are to govern themselves.” Jacksonian Democrats also showed little concern for the undemocratic constraints on African Americans, Native Americans, and women, all of whom were denied basic political and civil rights.

 ­anti-​­democratic forces

 Many southern slaveholders worried that the surge of democratic activism would eventually threaten the slave system. Virginian Muscoe Garnett, a planter and attorney, declared that “democracy is indeed incompatible with slavery, and the whole system of Southern society.” His fellow Virginian, George Fitzhugh, was more explicit in his disdain for democratic ideals. In every society, he asserted, “some were born with saddles on their backs, and others booted and spurred to ride them.” Still, in the face of such opposition, Jacksonian Democrats helped expand economic opportunity and political participation for workingmen (white factory laborers, craftsmen and mechanics, small farmers, and l­and-​­hungry frontiersmen). Andrew Jackson promised to protect “the poor and humble” from the “tyranny of wealth and power.” His goal was to elevate the “laboring classes” of white men who “love liberty and desire nothing but equal rights and equal laws.”

 democracy unleashed The rowdy inauguration of President Jackson symbolized the democratization of political life. Dressed in a black mourning suit in honor of his recently deceased wife, the s­elf-​­described ­people’s president stepped out of the U.S. Capitol at noon on March 4, 1829. Waiting for him in the cold were 15,000 people who collectively roared and waved their hats when they saw Jackson emerge. “I never saw anything like it before,” marveled Daniel Webster, the great senator from Massachusetts. Once the wild cheering subsided, Jackson bowed before the crowd with great dignity, acknowledging their excitement and urging them to settle down. He then delivered a typically brief speech in which he promised that his administration would be committed to “the task of reform” in the federal government, taking jobs out of “unfaithful or incompetent hands” and balancing states’ rights with the exercise of national power. He also pledged to pursue the will of the people in exercising his new presidential powers. After being sworn in by Chief Justice John Marshall, President Jackson mounted his white horse and rode down a muddy Pennsylvania Avenue to the White House, where his cherished democracy lost control in a wild

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 425

24/10/15 1:51 PM


 426  CHAPTER 10  The Jacksonian Era 1828–1840

 celebration. The huge crowd of jubilant western Democrats partying in the White House and outside on the lawn quickly turned into a drunken mob as they consumed ­alcohol-​­laced punch. Dishes, glasses, and furniture were smashed, and ­muddy-​­booted revelers broke windows, ripped down draperies, and trampled on rugs. A Washington lady marveled at the arrival of frontier democracy in the nation’s capital: “What a scene we did witness! The majesty of the ­people had disappeared, and a rabble, a mob, of boys, negroes, women, children, scrambling, fighting, romping. What a pity, what a pity!” Those already skeptical of Jackson’s qualifications for office saw the boisterous inaugural party as a symbol of all that was wrong with the “democratic” movement. Supreme Court Justice Joseph Story said he had never seen such “a mixture” of rowdy people, from the “highest and most polished down to the most vulgar and gross in the nation.” Here was Jacksonian democracy at work, he shuddered. “The reign of king mob seemed triumphant.” Another guest reported that “no arrangements had been made” to handle such a large and misbehaving crowd at the White House. At one point, Jackson’s aides became so concerned for the president’s personal safety that they whisked him out a rear exit to a boardinghouse a few blocks away.

 All Creation Going to the White House In this depiction of Andrew Jackson’s inauguration party, satirist Robert Cruikshank draws a visual parallel to Noah’s Ark, suggesting that people from all walks of life were now welcome in the White House.

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 426

24/10/15 1:52 PM


Jackson as President  427


Jackson as President
 Jackson sought to increase the powers of the presidency at the expense of the legislative and judicial branches. One of his opponents noted that previous presidents had assumed that Congress was the primary branch of government. Jackson, however, believed that the presidency was “superior.” The ruling political and economic elite must be removed, he said, for “the people” are the government, and too many government officials had grown corrupt and ­self-​­serving at the expense of the public interest. To dislodge the “corrupt” eastern political elite, Jackson launched a policy he called “rotation in office,” whereby he replaced many federal officials with his own supporters. Government jobs—​­district attorneys, federal marshals, customs c­ ollectors—​­belonged to the people, not to career bureaucrats. Democracy, he believed, was best served when the winning party’s “newly elected officials” appointed new government officials. Such partisan behavior came to be called “the spoils system,” since, as a prominent New York Democrat declared, “to the victor belong the spoils.” Jackson also sought to cut federal spending to help pay off the federal debt (a “national curse”); he supported internal improvements that were truly national in scope, promoted a “judicious tariff,” and called for the relocation of the “­ill-​­fated race” of Indians still living in the East to new lands across the Mississippi River so that they could be “protected” while their ancestral lands were confiscated, sold, and developed.

 the eaton affair

 Yet Jackson soon found himself preoccupied with squabbles within his own cabinet. From the outset, his administration was divided between supporters of Secretary of State Martin Van Buren and those allied with Vice President John C. Calhoun of South Carolina, both of whom wanted to succeed Jackson as president. Jackson turned mostly to Van Buren for advice because he did not trust Calhoun, a Yale graduate of towering intellect and fiery determination. Although earlier a nationalist, Calhoun now was focused on defending southern interests, especially the preservation of the ­slave-​­based cotton economy that had made him a wealthy planter. In his rivalry with Calhoun, Van Buren took full advantage of a juicy social scandal known as the Peggy Eaton affair. Widower John Eaton, a former U.S. senator from Tennessee, was one of Jackson’s closest friends. Eaton had also long been associated with Margaret “Peggy” O’Neale Timberlake, an outspoken Washington temptress married to John Timberlake, a naval officer frequently at sea.

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 427

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 428  CHAPTER 10  The Jacksonian Era 1828–1840

 The flirtatious Peggy Timberlake was devastatingly attractive to the men who kept her company while her husband was away. The ambitious daughter of an innkeeper, Peggy enjoyed “the attentions of men, young and old”; she took special delight in Senator John Eaton. In April 1828, John Timberlake died at sea. Although the official cause of death was respiratory failure, rumors swirled that he had committed suicide after learning of his wife’s affair with Eaton. ­ resident-​ Soon after the 1828 presidential election, John Eaton had written P ­elect Jackson to alert him of the spiteful gossip aimed at himself and Peggy Timberlake. Jackson responded quickly and firmly: “Marry her and you will be in a position to defend her.” Eaton did so on January 1, 1829. Eaton’s enemies quickly criticized the “unseemly haste” of the marriage and continued to savage Peggy Eaton as a whore. Louis McLane, a U.S. senator from Delaware who would later serve in Jackson’s cabinet, gleefully sneered that Eaton, soon to be named Jackson’s secretary of war, “has just married his mistress, and the mistress of eleven dozen others.” Floride Calhoun, the vice president’s imperious wife, especially objected to Peggy Eaton’s unsavory past. At Jackson’s inaugural ball, she openly ignored her, as did the other ­cabinet-​ ­members’ wives. The constant gossip led Jackson to explode, shouting that “I did not come here [to Washington] to make a Cabinet for the Ladies of this place, but for the Nation.” In his view, women had no right to mix politics with social life; their doing so was nothing more than vicious meddling. He demanded loyalty from his administrative ­team—​­and their wives. For his part, Calhoun acknowledged that his wife Floride had a “suspicious and ­fault-​­finding temper” that caused “much vexation in the family.” Upon hearing about the spat in Washington, Louisa Adams, wife of the former president, John Quincy Adams, reported that war had been “declared between some of the ladies in the city, and ladies’ wars are always fierce and hot.” Peggy Eaton’s plight reminded Jackson of the ­mean-​­spirited gossip that had plagued his own wife, Rachel. Intensely loyal to John Eaton, the president defended Peggy, insisting that she was as pure “as a virgin.” His cabinet members, however, were unable to cure their wives of what Martin Van Buren dubbed “the Eaton Malaria.” Nor did Peggy Eaton help her own cause. She once said that “I never had a lover who was not a gentleman.” Her social enemies, she explained, were so “very jealous of me” because “none of them had beauty, accomplishments or graces in society of any kind.” The rumoring and sniping continued, month after month, and became a ­time-​­consuming distraction for the president. Jackson blamed the Eaton scandal, also known as the “Petticoat Affair,” on his rivals Henry Clay and John C. Calhoun, the latter whom he called a “villain.” The president assumed that Calhoun and his wife had targeted John Eaton

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 428

24/10/15 1:52 PM


Jackson as President  429


 because he did not support Calhoun’s desire to be the next president. One of Calhoun’s friends wrote in April 1829 that the United States was “governed by the ­ President—​­ the President by the Secretary of W ­ ar—​­and the latter by his Wife.” Jackson concluded that the scheming Calhoun was one of the “most dangerous men ­living—​­a man, devoid of principle” who “would sacrifice his friend, his country, and forsake his god, for selfish personal ambition.”

 the maysville road veto When Jackson was not dealing

 with the “Petticoat Affair,” he ­deci­sively used his executive authority to limit the role of the federal ­government—​­while at the same time delivering additional blows to rivals John C. Calhoun and King Andrew the First Opponents Henry Clay. In 1830, Congress passed a bill considered Jackson’s veto of the Maysville Road Bill an abuse of power. pushed by Calhoun and Clay that autho- This cartoon shows “King Andrew” rized the use of federal monies to build trampling on the Constitution, internal a ­sixty-​­mile-​­long road across the state of improvements, and the Bank of the Kentucky from the city of Maysville to United States. Lexington, Clay’s hometown. President Jackson vetoed the bill on the grounds that the proposed road was a “purely local matter,” being solely in the state of Kentucky, and thus outside the domain of Congress because it was not an interstate project. Clay was stunned. “We are all shocked and mortified by the rejection of the Maysville road,” he wrote a friend. But he had no luck convincing Congress to override the presidential veto.

The Eastern Indians
 President Jackson’s forcible removal of Indians from their ancestral lands was his highest priority and one of his lowest moments. Like most white frontiersmen, he saw Indians as barbarians who were to be treated as “subjects,” not “nations.” His National Republican opponent, Henry Clay, felt the same way, arguing that the Indians were “destined to extinction” and not “worth preserving.”

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 429

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 430  CHAPTER 10  The Jacksonian Era 1828–1840

 After Jackson’s election in 1828, he followed up on policies developed by previous presidents by urging that the Eastern Indians (east of the Mississippi River) be moved to reservations west of the Mississippi River, in what became Oklahoma. Jackson believed that moving the Indians would serve their best interests as well as the national interest, for the states in the Lower South, especially the Carolinas, Georgia, and Alabama, were aggressively restricting the rights of Indian nations and taking their land. President Jackson often told Indian leaders that he was their “Great Father” trying to protect them from the greedy state governments. New state laws in Alabama, Georgia, and Mississippi abolished tribal units, stripped them of their civil rights, rejected ancestral Indian land claims, and denied Indians the right to vote or to testify in court. Jackson claimed that relocating the Eastern Indians was a “wise and humane policy” that would save them from “utter annihilation” if tribes tried to hold on to their lands in the face of state actions.

 indian removal

 In 1830, Jackson submitted to Congress the Indian Removal Act, which authorized him to ignore treaty commitments made by previous presidents and to convince the Indians remaining in the East and South to move to federal lands west of the Mississippi River. The federal government, the new program promised, would pay for the Indian exodus and give them initial support in their new lands in Oklahoma. Jackson’s proposal provoked heated opposition, not only among the Indian peoples but also among reformers who distrusted the president’s motives and doubted the promised support from the federal government. Critics flooded Congress with petitions that criticized the removal policy and warned that Jackson’s plan would bring “enduring shame” on the nation. Indian leaders were skeptical from the start. As a federal agent reported, “They see that our professions are insincere, that our promises are broken, that the happiness of the Indian is a cheap sacrifice to the acquisition of new lands.” The proposal also sparked intense debate in Congress. Theodore Frelinghuysen, a New Jersey National Republican, gave a s­ ix-​­hour speech in the Senate during which he asked, “Do the obligations of justice change with the color of the skin? Is it one of the prerogatives of the white man, that he may disregard the dictates of moral principles, when an Indian shall be concerned?” In the end, Congress answered yes. The House of Representatives and Senate both narrowly approved the Indian Removal Bill, with most southerners voting for it and northerners against it. Jackson eagerly signed the measure, and it became law on May 26, 1830. Federal agents thereafter bribed and bullied tribal chiefs to get their consent to relocate to the West. “Our doom is

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 430

24/10/15 1:52 PM


Jackson as President  431


INDIAN REMOVAL, 1820–1840

Mis Black Hawk War, 1832
 u so

IOWA TERRITORY 1832

 ri Ri

 ver

UNORGANIZED TERRITORY

 SAUK

Lake
Huron


L a k e M i c h i gan


WISCONSIN TERR.

MICHIGAN
La 
 ke

Lak


 e Ont

 ario

NEW YORK

 e Eri

 PENNSYLVANIA

 FOX

Mi s s


 ILLINOIS

 NJ

 OHIO

 INDIANA

 MD

 DE

 i ss

 ipp

 VIRGINIA

 i

Ar


 MISSOURI

 as ns

 ve

Ri


 ka

 KENTUCKY

 r

Ri


NORTH CAROLINA

 ve

 INDIAN r LANDS

TENNESSEE AR
Tra il of Tears 
 New Echota SOUTH

CHEROKEE CAROLINA CHICKASAW AL
Charleston CREEK GEORGIA CHOCTAW 
TEXAS REPUBLIC 1836–1845

MS LA

 FL

ATLANTIC OCEAN SEMINOLE

MEXICO
Ceded by Native Americans Ceded to Native Americans Battle site ■ 




200 Miles


200 Kilometers


 Why did Congress relocate the Choctaws, Chickasaws, Creeks, Seminoles, and

WWN64
Cherokees to territory west of Arkansas and Missouri? Figure M10_1 ■ How far did the exiled Indians have to travel, and what were the conditions on the First proof 31p0 xjourney? 30p6 ■ 
 Why were the Indians not forced to move before the 1830s?

 sealed,” lamented a Choctaw warrior. “There is no other course for us but to turn our faces to our new homes toward the setting sun.”

 resistance

 Most northern Indians gave in to federal threats and were relocated. In Illinois and the Wisconsin Territory, however, Sauk and Fox Indians fought to regain their ancestral lands. The Black Hawk War erupted

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 431

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 432  CHAPTER 10  The Jacksonian Era 1828–1840

 in April 1832, when Chief Black Hawk led 1,000 ­Sauks—​­men, women, and ­ erritory—​­back across the Mischildren who had been relocated to the Iowa T sissippi River to their homeland in Illinois, land shared with the Fox Nation. After several skirmishes, Indiana and Illinois militia chased the Sauk and Fox into the Wisconsin Territory and caught them on the eastern bank of the Mississippi River, a few miles downstream from the mouth of the Bad Axe River. The soldiers misinterpreted the Indians’ effort to surrender, and fighting erupted. In what became known as the Bad Axe Massacre, the militiamen murdered hundreds of women and children as they tried to escape. The soldiers then scalped the dead Indians and cut long strips of flesh from several of them for use as strops to sharpen razors. Six weeks later, the Sauk leader, Black Hawk, was captured and imprisoned. In Florida, the Seminoles, led by Osceola (called by U.S. soldiers “the still unconquered red man”) ferociously resisted the federal removal policy. For eight years, the Seminoles would fight a ­hit-​­and-​­run guerrilla war in the swamps of the ­Everglades—​­the longest, most costly, and deadliest war ever fought by Native Americans. Some 1,500 Americans were killed. At times, Seminole women killed their children rather than see them captured. But their heroic resistance waned after 1837, when Osceola was treacherously captured under a white flag of truce, imprisoned, and left to die of malaria at Fort Moultrie near Charleston, South Carolina. After 1842, only a few hundred Seminoles remained, hiding in the swamps. It was not until 1934 that the few surviving Seminoles in Florida became the last Native American tribe to end its war with the United States.

 the cherokees

 The Cherokee Nation also tried to defy the federal removal policy. A largely agricultural people, Cherokees had long occupied northwest Georgia and the mountainous areas of northern Alabama, eastern Tennessee, and western North Carolina. In 1827, relying upon their established treaty rights, the Cherokees adopted a constitution as an independent nation in which they declared that they were not subject to the laws or control of any state or federal government. Georgia officials had other ideas. In 1828, shortly after Jackson’s election, the Georgia government ­announ­ced that after June 1, 1830, the authority of state law would extend to the Cherokees. They would no longer be a “nation within a nation.” The ­“barbarous and savage tribes” must give way to the march of white civilization. Under the new state laws, they would not be allowed to vote, own property, or testify against whites in court. The discovery of gold in north Georgia in 1829 had increased whites’ lust for Cherokee land, attracted trespassing prospectors, and led to the new state

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 432

24/10/15 1:52 PM


Jackson as President  433


 law. It prohibited the Cherokees from digging for gold on their own lands. The Cherokees sought relief in the Supreme Court, arguing that “we wish to remain on the land of our fathers. We have a perfect and original right to remain without interruption or molestation.” In Cherokee Nation v. Georgia (1831), Chief Justice John Marshall ruled that the Cherokees had “an unquestionable right” to maintain control of their ancestral lands, but the Court could not render a verdict because of a technicality: the Cherokees had filed suit as a “foreign nation” when in Marshall’s view they were “domestic dependent nations.” If it were true that “wrongs have been inflicted,” Marshall explained, “this is not the tribunal which can redress the past or prevent the future.” The following year, the Supreme Court did rule in favor of the Cherokees in Worcester v. Georgia (1832). The case arose when Georgia officials arrested a group of white Christian missionaries who were living among the Cherokees in violation of a state law forbidding such interaction. Two of the missionaries, Samuel Worcester and Elihu Butler, were sentenced to four years at hard labor. They appealed to the Supreme Court. In the Worcester case, John Marshall said the missionaries must be released. The ­anti-​­Cherokee laws passed by the Georgia legislature, he declared, had violated “the Constitution, laws, and treaties of the United States.” He added that the Cherokee Nation was “a distinct political community” within which Georgia law had no force. Both Supreme Court decisions favored the Cherokee argument that their ancestral lands could not be taken from them, in part because they had Cherokees divided While many earlier signed treaties with the state and Cherokee elite fought against Jackson’s federal governments confirming their policies, Elias Boudinot, editor of the rights to those lands. President Jack- first Native American newspaper, son, however, refused to enforce the Cherokee Phoenix, signed the Indian Removal Treaty in 1835. He was Court’s “wicked” decisions, claiming subsequently murdered. that he had no constitutional authority

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 433

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 434  CHAPTER 10  The Jacksonian Era 1828–1840

 to intervene in Georgia. A New York newspaper editor reported that Jackson said, “John Marshall has made his decision, now let him enforce it.” Thereafter, Jackson gave the Cherokees and other Indian nations a terrible choice: either abide by the discriminatory new state laws or relocate to ­government-​­owned lands west of the Mississippi River, which would be theirs “forever.” Jackson told the Creeks that they and whites could not live “in harmony and peace” if they remained on their ancestral lands and told them that “a speedy removal” to the West was their only option. Soon, Georgia officials began selling Cherokee lands. The irony of the new Georgia policy was that of all the southern tribes, the Cherokees had come closest to adopting the customs of white America. They had abandoned traditional hunting practices to develop farms, build roads, schools, and churches, and create trading posts and newspapers. Many Cherokees had married whites, adopted their clothing and food, and converted to Christianity. And the Cherokees owned some 2,000 enslaved African Americans.

 the trail of tears The federal officials responsible for implementing the Indian Removal Act developed a strategy of divide and conquer with the Cherokees. In 1835, for example, a minority faction of the Cherokees

 Trail of Tears Thousands of Cherokees died on a nightmarish march from Georgia to Oklahoma after being forced from their native lands.

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 434

24/10/15 1:52 PM


Jackson as President  435


 signed the fraudulent Treaty of New Echota, which was rejected by 90 percent of the Cherokee people but readily accepted by the U.S. Senate and enforced by the U.S. Army. In 1838, after President Jackson had left office and Martin Van Buren was president, 17,000 Cherokees were evicted and moved West under military guard on the Trail of Tears, an 800-mile forced journey marked by the cruelty of soldiers and the neglect of irresponsible private contractors assigned to manage the process. Some 4,000 of the refugees died along the way. Van Buren’s favorite niece was so upset by the treatment of the Indians that she opposed her uncle’s reelection. For his part, President Van Buren told Congress in December 1838 that he took “sincere pleasure” in reporting that the entire Cherokee Nation had been relocated. The Trail of Tears was, according to a white Georgian, “the cruelest work I ever knew.” A few Cherokees held out in the mountains of North Carolina; they became known as the “Eastern Band” of Cherokees. The Creeks and Chickasaws followed the Trail of Tears a few years later, after Alabama and Mississippi used the same techniques as the Georgia government to take control of their tribal lands. Some 100,000 Eastern Indians were relocated to the West during the 1820s and 1830s, and the government sold some 100 million acres of Indian land, most of it in the prime ­cotton-​­growing areas of Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi, known as the Old Southwest.

The Bank War
 Jackson showed the same principled stubbornness in dealing with the national bank as he did in removing the Indians. The First Bank of the United States (B.U.S.) had been renewed in 1816 as the Second Bank of the United States, which soon became the largest corporation in the nation and the only truly national business enterprise. The second B.U.S. (the federal government owned only 20 percent of the bank’s capital) was a private corporation with extensive public ­responsibilities—​­and powers. To benefit the government, the B.U.S. held all federal funds, including tax collections (mostly from land sales and tariff revenues) and disbursed federal payments for its obligations, all in exchange for an annual $1.5 million fee. The B.U.S., however, conducted other business throughout the country like a commercial bank, and was free to use the government deposits in its vaults as collateral for loans it made to businesses around the country. Headquartered in Philadelphia and supported by ­twenty-​­nine branches around the nation, the B.U.S. competed with ­state-​­chartered banks for local business.

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 435

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 436  CHAPTER 10  The Jacksonian Era 1828–1840

 The B.U.S. helped accelerate business expansion by making loans to individuals, businesses, and state banks. It also helped promote a stable money supply and deter excessive lending by requiring the 464 state banks to keep enough gold and silver coins (called specie) in their vaults to back their own paper currency, which they in turn loaned to individuals and businesses. Prior to the B.U.S. being reestablished, the number of unstable and unregulated state banks had increased dramatically. Most of them issued their own paper money, and half of those created between 1810 and 1820 had gone bankrupt by 1825. The primary benefit of the B.U.S. was its ability to monitor and regulate many of the state banks. With federal revenues soaring from land sales during the early 1830s, the B.U.S., led by the brilliant but arrogant Nicholas Biddle, had accumu­ oney—​­ and economic power. Even though lated massive amounts of m the B.U.S. benefited the national economy, state banks, especially in the South

 Rechartering the Bank Jackson’s effort to defeat the recharter of the B.U.S. is likened to fighting a hydra, a ­many-​­headed serpent from Greek mythology. Just as the hydra would sprout two heads when one was severed, for each B.U.S. supporter that Jackson subdued, even more supporters would emerge to take his place.

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 436

24/10/15 1:52 PM


Jackson as President  437


 and West, feared its growing “monopolistic” power. Critics claimed that B ­ iddle and the B.U.S. directors, most of whom lived in the Northeast, were so focused on their own profits that they were restricting lending by state banks and impeding businesses from borrowing as much as they wanted. Andrew Jackson had always hated banks and bankers, whom he called “vipers and thieves.” His prejudice grew out of his own experiences with banks in the 1790s, when he had suffered huge financial losses. Now, as a popularly elected president, he claimed to speak for ordinary Americans who felt that banks favored the “rich and powerful” in the East. Jackson also distrusted banks because they printed too much paper money, causing prices to rise (inflation). He wanted only gold and silver coins to be used for economic transactions. “I think it right to be perfectly frank with you,” Jackson told Biddle in 1829. “I do not dislike your Bank any more than [I dislike] all banks.” But Jackson also disliked Biddle because he was everything that Jackson was not: an Easterner born to wealth, highly educated, financially sophisticated, and a world traveler. Ironically, Biddle had voted for Jackson. The national bank may have become too powerful, as Jackson charged, but the Bank War between Jackson and Biddle revealed that the president never truly understood the national bank’s role or policies, and he continued to let personal animosity drive many of his policy decisions. The B.U.S. had provided a stable monetary system for the expanding economy, as well as a mechanism for controlling the pace and integrity of economic growth by regulating the ability of branch banks and state banks to issue paper currency.

 the recharter effort

 Although the charter for the B.U.S. ran through 1836, Nicholas Biddle could not afford to wait until then for its renewal. Leaders of the National Republican party, especially Senators Henry Clay and Daniel Webster (who was a paid legal counsel to the B.U.S.), told Biddle that the charter needed to be renewed before the 1836 presidential election. They assured him that Congress would renew the charter, leading the impolitic Biddle to grow overconfident about the bank’s future. Jackson, he said, “thinks because he has scalped Indians . . . he is to have his way with the Bank.” Biddle and his political allies, however, failed to appreciate Jackson’s tenacity and the depth of his hatred for the B.U.S. And most voters were on Jackson’s side. In the end, Biddle, Clay, and the National Republicans unintentionally handed Jackson a popular issue on the eve of the election. At their nominating convention in December 1831, the National Republicans endorsed Clay as their presidential candidate and approved the renewal of the B.U.S.

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 437

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 438  CHAPTER 10  The Jacksonian Era 1828–1840

 Early in the summer of 1832, both houses of Congress passed the bank recharter bill, in part because Biddle provided bribes to win votes. Upon ­learning of such shenanigans, Jackson’s chief of staff concluded that the B.U.S. was “becoming desperate: caught in its own net.” Biddle, Webster, and Clay assumed that Jackson would not veto the recharter bill because doing so might cost him reelection. “Should Jackson veto the bill,” Clay boasted, “I will veto him.” On July 10, 1832, however, Jackson nixed the bill, sending it back to Congress with a blistering criticism of the bank’s directors for making the “rich richer and the potent more powerful” while discriminating against “the humble members of s­ ociety—​­the farmers, mechanics, and laborers.” Daniel Webster accused Jackson of using the bank issue “to stir up the poor against the rich.” To Henry Clay, Jackson’s veto represented another example of the president’s desire to concentrate “all power in the hands of one man.” Clay and Webster, however, could not convince the Senate to override the veto, thus setting the stage for a nationwide financial debate and a dramatic presidential campaign. The overriding issue in the election was the future of the Bank of the United States. Let the people decide, Jackson argued. “I have now done my duty to the citizens of this country,” he said in explaining his veto. “If sustained by my ­fellow-​ ­citizens [in the upcoming election], I shall be grateful and happy; if not, I shall find in the motives which impel me ample grounds for contentment and peace.”

Nullification
 Andrew Jackson eventually would veto twelve congressional bills, more than all previous presidents combined. Critics claimed that his behavior was “monarchical” in its frequent defiance of the will of Congress. Jackson, however, believed that the president represented all of the people, unlike congressmen who were elected locally. His commitment to nationalism over sectionalism was nowhere more evident than in his handling of the nullification crisis in South Carolina. In that volatile situation he would greatly expand the scope of presidential authority by forcing the nullifiers to back down.

 calhoun and the tariff Vice President John C. Calhoun became President Jackson’s fiercest critic because of changing economic conditions in his home state of South Carolina. The financial panic of 1819 had sparked a nationwide depression. Through the 1820s, South Carolina ­continued to suffer from a collapse in cotton prices. The state lost almost

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 438

24/10/15 1:52 PM


Nullification  439


 70,000 people during that ­ ten-​­ year ­period—​­the result of residents moving West in search of cheaper and ­more-​ ­fertile land for growing cotton. Twice as many would leave during the 1830s. Most South Carolinians blamed their woes on the Tariff of 1828, which was labeled the Tariff of Abominations. By taxing British cloth coming into U.S. markets, the tariff hurt southern cotton growers by reducing British demand for raw cotton from America. It also hurt southerners by John C. Calhoun During the Civil War, raising the prices they had to pay for the Confederate government printed, imported products. The tariff debate but never issued, a ­one-​­cent postage revealed how the North and South had stamp bearing this likeness of Calhoun. developed different economic interests and different ways of protecting those interests. Massachusetts was prospering while South Carolina was struggling. In a lengthy pamphlet called the South Carolina Exposition and Protest (1828), Calhoun claimed that the Tariff of 1828 favored the interests of New England textile manufacturing over southern agriculture. Under such circumstances, he argued, a state could “nullify,” or veto, a federal law it deemed unconstitutional. Nullification was the ultimate weapon for those determined to protect states’ rights against federal authority. As President Jackson and others pointed out, however, allowing states to pick and choose which federal laws they would follow would create national chaos, which he would not allow.

 clash of t ­ itans–​­webster versus hayne

 The controversy over the Tariff of 1828 simmered until 1830, when the ­Webster–​­Hayne debate in Congress sharpened the lines between states’ rights and national authority. In a fiery speech, Senator Robert Y. Hayne of South Carolina argued that the ­anti-​­slavery Yankees were invading the South, “making war upon her citizens, and endeavoring to overthrow her principles and institutions.” In Hayne’s view, the Union was created by the states, and the states therefore had the right to nullify federal laws. The independence of the states was to him more important than the preservation of the Union. Massachusetts senator Daniel Webster quickly challenged Hayne’s arguments. Blessed with a thunderous voice and a theatrical flair, Webster was an

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 439

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 440  CHAPTER 10  The Jacksonian Era 1828–1840

 Webster Replying to Senator Hayne (1848) The eloquent Massachusetts senator challenges the argument for nullification in the ­Webster–​­Hayne debate.

 unapologetic Unionist determined “to strengthen the ties that hold us together.” He pointed out that the U.S. Constitution was created not by the states but by the American people. If states were allowed to nullify a federal law, the Union would be nothing but a “rope of sand.” South Carolina’s defiance of federal authority, he charged, “is nothing more than resistance by ­force—​­it is disunion by ­force—​­it is secession by ­force—​­it is civil war.” Webster’s powerful closing ­statement—“Liberty and Union, now and forever, one and inseparable”—was printed in virtually every newspaper in the nation. Abraham Lincoln later called it “the very best speech ever delivered.” Even Hayne was awestruck. He told Webster that “a man who can make such speeches as that ought never to die.” In the end, Webster rather than Hayne had the better argument. President Jackson did not attend the debate, but he kept abreast of it from the White House. When he asked an aide how Webster was doing, the answer was what he wanted: “He is delivering a most powerful speech . . . demolishing our friend Hayne.” The president was pleased. As Jackson said, the Constitution and its laws remained “supreme.”

 calhoun versus jackson

 That Jackson, like Calhoun, was a ­cotton-​­planting slaveholder led many southerners to assume that the president would support their resistance to the federal tariff. Jackson was s­ ympathetic—​

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 440

24/10/15 1:52 PM


Nullification  441


 ­ ntil Calhoun and others in South Carolina threatened to “nullify” federal u laws they did not like. He then turned on them with the same angry force he had directed toward the advancing British army at New Orleans in 1815. On April 13, 1830, the Democratic party hosted scores of congressmen and political leaders at the first annual Jefferson Day dinner. When it was Jackson’s turn to salute Jefferson’s memory, he rose to his feet, raised his glass, and, while glaring at Calhoun, growled: “Our ­Union—​­It must be preserved!” People gasped, knowing that the vice president, as if challenged to a duel, must reply to Jackson’s threat to the southern weapon of nullification. Calhoun stood and, trembling with emotion, countered with a defiant toast to “the Union, next to our liberty the most dear!” In that dramatic exchange, Jackson and Calhoun laid bare the fundamental tension between federal authority and states’ rights that has remained one of the animating themes of the American republic. Soon thereafter, another incident deepened the hatred between the two men. On May 12, 1830, the president saw for the first time a letter from 1818 in which Calhoun, then secretary of war in the Monroe administration, had wanted to discipline General Jackson for his unauthorized invasion of ­Spanish-​­held Florida. After exchanging heated letters about the incident with Calhoun, Jackson told a friend that he was finally through with the “double dealing of J.C.C.” The rift between the two proud men prompted Jackson to take a dramatic step suggested by Secretary of State Martin Van Buren, his closest and most cunning adviser. During one of their daily horseback rides together, Van Buren offered himself up as a sacrifice as a way to remove all Calhoun supporters from the cabinet and thereby end the ongoing Eaton affair that had fractured the administration. As the first step in the planned cabinet coup, Van Buren convinced John Eaton to resign as secretary of war on April 4, 1831. Four days later, Van Buren resigned as secretary of state. “The long agony is over,” crowed Samuel Ingham, the secretary of the Treasury, in a letter to Attorney General John Berrien. “Mr. V. B. and Major Eaton have resigned.” What Ingham and Berrien did not realize was that a few days later, Jackson would force t­hem—​­both Calhoun ­supporters—​­to resign as well. Jackson now had a clean slate on which to create another cabinet. Never before had a president dismissed his entire cabinet. Critics saw through the secretary of state’s scheme: “Mr. Van Buren may be called the ‘Great Magician,’” wrote the New York Courier, “for he raises his wand, and the whole Cabinet disappears.” Others claimed that the cabinet purge showed ­ ewspaper that Jackson did not have the political skill to lead the nation. One n

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 441

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 442  CHAPTER 10  The Jacksonian Era 1828–1840

 announced that the ship of state “is sinking and the rats are flying! The hull is too leaky to mend, and the hero of two wars and a half has not the skill to keep it afloat.” John Quincy Adams told his son that the stunning cabinet purge had put all of Washington in a state of confusion: “people ­stare—​­and ­laugh—​­and say, what next?” The next act in the running political drama occurred when John Eaton challenged Ingham to a duel. The ousted Treasury secretary chose instead to retreat to his home in Pennsylvania. After the Eatons left Washington, D.C., a gloating Henry Clay retrieved William Shakespeare’s characterization of Egyptian queen Cleopatra to mark Peggy’s departure: “Age cannot wither nor time stale her infinite virginity.” The Rats Leaving a Falling House During his first term, Jackson was beset by dissension within his administration. Here, “public confidence in the stability of this administration” is toppling.

 new cabinets

By the end of
 August 1831, Jackson had appointed a new cabinet, all of whom agreed to treat Peggy Eaton with respect. At the same time, Jackson increasingly relied upon the advice of Martin Van Buren and others making up the president’s ­so-​­called “kitchen cabinet,” an informal group of close friends and supporters, many of them Democratic newspaper editors. The kitchen cabinet soon convinced Jackson to drop his pledge to serve only one term. They explained that it would be hard for Van Buren, the president’s chosen successor, to win the 1832 Democratic nomination because Calhoun would do everything in his power to stop h ­ im—​­and Calhoun might win the nomination himself. In early 1831, the Washington Globe, a Democratic newspaper, announced that Jackson would seek a second term. “The conquering Hero is again in the field, and it must now be seen who are his friends and who are his foes.”

 the ­anti-​­masonic party

 In 1832, for the first time in a presidential election, a third political party entered the field. The ­Anti-​­Masonic

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 442

24/10/15 1:52 PM


Nullification  443


 party grew out of popular hostility toward the Masonic fraternal order, a large, ­all-​­male social organization that originated in Great Britain early in the eighteenth century. The Masons often claimed to be the natural leaders of their communities, the “best men.” By 1830, more than 2,000 Masonic “lodges” were scattered across the United States with about 100,000 members, including Andrew Jackson and Henry Clay. The new ­anti-​­Masonic party owed its origins to a defrocked Mason, William Morgan, a ­fifty-​­two-​­year-​­old unemployed bricklayer in Batavia, New York. Morgan had been thrown out of the Masons because of his joblessness. Seeking revenge, he convinced a local printer to publish a widely circulated pamphlet revealing the secret rituals of the Masonic order. Masons then tried to burn down the print shop where the pamphlet had been published. They also had Morgan arrested on a ­trumped-​­up charge of indebtedness. Soon thereafter, on September 12, 1826, someone paid for his release from jail and spirited Morgan away in a waiting carriage. A year later, a man’s decomposed body was found in Oak Orchard Creek, near Lake Ontario. Morgan’s grieving wife confirmed that it was her husband. Governor Dewitt Clinton, himself a Mason, offered a reward for anyone who would identify the kidnappers. The Morgan mystery became a major political issue. New York launched more than twenty investigations into Morgan’s disappearance (and presumed murder) and conducted a dozen trials of several Masons but never gained a conviction. Each legal effort aroused more public indignation because most of the judges, lawyers, and jurors were Masons. People began to fear that the Masons had become a ­self-​­appointed aristocracy lacking the education and character necessary for ­self-​­denying civic leadership. John Quincy Adams said that disbanding the “Masonic institution” was the most important issue facing “us and our posterity.” Suspicions of the Masonic order as a tyrannical secret brotherhood intent on subverting democracy gave rise to the grassroots political movement known as the ­Anti-​­Masonic party whose purpose was to protect republican values from being corrupted by ­self-​­serving, ­power-​­hungry Masonic insiders. The ­Anti-​­Masons claimed that they were determined to “hand down to posterity unimpaired the republic we inherited from our forefathers.” The new party drew most of its support from New Englanders and New Yorkers alienated by both the Democratic and National Republican parties. ­Anti-​­Masonic adherents tended to be rural evangelical Protestants, many of whom also opposed slavery. Opposition to a fraternal organization was hardly the foundation upon ­ nti-​­Masonic party had which to build a lasting political coalition, but the A three important “firsts” to its credit: in addition to being the first third party

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 443

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 444  CHAPTER 10  The Jacksonian Era 1828–1840

 The Verdict of the People George Caleb Bingham’s painting depicts a socially diverse electorate, suggesting the increasingly democratic politics of the Jacksonian Era.

 with a national base of support, it was the first political party to hold a national convention to nominate a presidential candidate, and the first to announce a formal platform of specific policy goals.

 the 1832 election

 In preparing for the 1832 election, the Democrats and the National Republicans followed the example of the A ­ nti-​­Masonic party by holding presidential nominating conventions of their own for the first time. In December 1831, the National Republicans gathered to nominate Henry Clay. Jackson endorsed the idea of a nominating convention for the Democratic party as well, because it gave the people a greater role in choosing nominees. The Democratic convention first adopted the ­two-​­thirds rule for nomination (which prevailed until 1936, when the requirement became a simple majority), and then named New Yorker Martin Van Buren as Jackson’s vice presidential running mate. The Democrats, unlike the other two parties, adopted no formal platform and relied to a substantial degree upon the popularity of the president to carry their cause. Nicholas Biddle invested the vast resources of the B.U.S. into the campaign against Jackson and paid for thousands of pamphlets promoting Clay. By the summer of 1832, Clay declared that “the campaign is over, and I think we have

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 444

24/10/15 1:52 PM


Nullification  445


 won the victory.” He spoke too soon. His blinding ego prevented him from seeing the sources of Jackson’s popularity. Where he dismissed Jackson as a ­power-​­hungry military chief, most Americans saw the president as someone fighting for their own causes. Clay also failed to understand Jackson’s effectiveness as a new type of engaged political candidate. The National Intelligencer, a newspaper that supported Clay, acknowledged that Jackson’s eager participation in campaign events was “certainly a new mode of electioneering. We do not recollect before to have heard of a President of the United States descending in person into the political arena.” Jackson gave stump speeches, dived into crowds to shake hands, and walked in parades or ate barbecue with loving supporters who cheered and mobbed him. In the end, Jackson earned 219 electoral votes to Clay’s 49, and enjoyed a solid victory in the popular vote: 688,000 to 530,000. William Wirt, the ­Anti-​ ­Masonic candidate, carried only Vermont, winning 7 electoral votes. Dazzled by the president’s strong showing, Wirt observed that Jackson could “be President for life if he chooses.”

The Nullification Crisis
 In the fall of 1831, Jackson tried to defuse the confrontation with South Carolina by calling on Congress to reduce tariff rates. Congress responded with the Tariff of 1832, which lowered rates on some products but kept them high on British cotton fabric and clothing. The new tariff disappointed Calhoun and others in his home state eager for the British to buy more southern cotton. South Carolinians seethed with resentment toward the federal government. Living in the only state where enslaved Africans were a majority of the population, they feared that if the northern representatives in Congress were powerful enough to create such high tariffs that proved so harmful to the South, they might eventually vote to end slavery itself. Calhoun declared that the “peculiar domestic institutions of the southern states” (by which he meant slavery) were at stake.

 south carolina nullifiers

 In November 1832, just weeks after Jackson was reelected, a special convention in South Carolina passed an Ordinance of Nullification that disavowed the “unconstitutional” federal Tariffs of 1828 and 1832 (declaring them “null, void, and no law”). If federal authorities tried to use force to collect the tariffs on foreign goods unloaded in Charleston Harbor, South Carolina would secede from the Union, they vowed. The state legislature then selected Senator Robert Hayne as governor and named Calhoun to replace him as U.S. senator. At the end of December,

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 445

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 446  CHAPTER 10  The Jacksonian Era 1828–1840

 South Carolina Ordinance of Nullification The 1832 ordinance repudiated two federal tariffs designed to protect northern industries. Though armed conflict was avoided, the same tensions that led to nullification would later lead to South Carolina’s secession.

 Calhoun resigned as vice president so that he could openly defend his nullification theory in Congress and oppose President Jackson’s “tyrannical” actions.

 jackson says no to nullification

 President Jackson’s public response was moderate. He promised to use “firmness and forbearance” with South Carolina but stressed that nullification “means insurrection and war; and the other states have a right to put it down.” In private, however, Jackson was furious. He asked the secretary of war how many soldiers it would take to go to South Carolina and “crush the monster [nullification] in its cradle.” He also threatened to hang Calhoun and other “nullifiers” if there were any bloodshed. “Surely the president is exaggerating,” Governor Hayne of South Carolina remarked to Senator Thomas Hart Benton of Missouri. Benton, who years before had been in a fistfight with Jackson, replied: “I have known General Jackson a great many years, and when he speaks of hanging, it is time to look for a rope.” During the fall of 1832, most northern state legislatures passed resolutions condemning the nullificationists. At the same time, the s­ laveholder-​­dominated southern states expressed sympathy for South Carolina, but none endorsed nullification. “We detest the tariff,” explained a Mississippian, “but we will hold to the Union.” South Carolina was left standing alone against Jackson. On December 10, 1832, the unyielding Jackson issued his official response to the people of South Carolina. In his blistering proclamation, he dismissed nullification as “an absurdity,” a “mad project of disunion” that was “incompatible with the existence of the Union, contradicted expressly by the letter of the Constitution, unauthorized by its spirit, inconsistent with every principle on which It was founded, and destructive of the great object for which it was formed.” He warned that nullification would lead to secession (formal withdrawal of a state from the United States), and secession meant civil war. “Be

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 446

24/10/15 1:52 PM


Nullification  447


 not deceived by names. Disunion by armed force is treason. Are you really ready to incur its guilt?”

 clay steps in

 President Jackson then sent federal soldiers and a warship to Charleston to protect the federal customhouse where tariffs were applied to imported products arriving on ships from Europe. Governor Hayne responded by mobilizing the state militia, and the two sides edged toward a violent confrontation. A South Carolina Unionist reported to Jackson from Charleston that many “reckless and dangerous men” were “looking for civil war and scenes of bloodshed.” While taking forceful actions, Jackson still wanted “peaceably to nullify the nullifiers.” In early 1833, the president requested from Congress the authority to use the U.S. Army to “force” compliance with federal law in South Carolina. Calhoun exploded on the Senate floor, exclaiming that he and the others defending his state’s constitutional rights were being threatened by what they called the Force Bill “to have our throats cut, and those of our wives and children.” The greatest threat facing the nation, he argued, was not nullification but presidential despotism. Calhoun and the nullifiers, however, soon backed down, and the South Carolina legislature postponed the implementation of the nullification ordinances in hopes that Congress would pass a more palatable tariff bill. Passage of a compromise bill, however, depended upon the support of Senator Henry Clay, himself a slaveholding planter, who finally yielded to those urging him to step in and save the day for the Union. A fellow senator told Clay that these “South Carolinians are good fellows, and it would be a pity to see Jackson hang them.” Clay agreed. On February 12, 1833, he circulated a plan suggested by Jackson to reduce, gradually over several years, the federal tariff on key imported items. Clay urged Congress to treat South Carolina with respect and display “that great principle of compromise and concession which lies at the bottom of our institutions.” The tariff reductions were less than South Carolina preferred, but Clay’s compromise helped the nullifiers out of the dilemma they had created. Calhoun supported the compromise: “He who loves the Union must desire to see this agitating question [the tariff] brought to a termination.” On March 1, 1833, Jackson signed into law the compromise tariff and the Force Bill, the latter being a symbolic statement of the primacy of the Union. Calhoun rushed home to convince the rebels in his state to back down. The South Carolina convention then met and rescinded its nullification of the tariff acts. In a ­face-​­saving gesture, the delegates nullified the Force Bill, which Jackson no longer needed.

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 447

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 448  CHAPTER 10  The Jacksonian Era 1828–1840

 Both sides felt they had won. Jackson had defended the supremacy of the Union without firing a shot, and South Carolina’s persistence had brought tariff reductions. Joel Poinsett, a South Carolina Unionist, was overjoyed with the resolution. “We have beat the Nullifiers and things are quiet for a time.” Poinsett, however, added that the next crisis would force a choice between “union and disunion.” While the immediate crisis was defused, however, its underlying causes persisted. Southern slaveholders felt increasingly threatened by a­nti-​­slavery sentiment in the North. “There is no ­liberty—​­no security for the South,” groused South Carolina radical Robert Barnwell Rhett. Others agreed. “The struggle, so far from being over,” a defiant Calhoun wrote, “is not more than fairly commenced.” Jackson concluded that the “tariff was only the pretext [for the nullification crisis], and disunion and southern confederacy the real object. The next pretext will be the negro, or slavery question.” Two days after the nullification crisis was resolved, Jackson was sworn in for a second term as president. The triumphant Jackson, observed John Quincy Adams, “conquers every thing.”

 War over the B.U.S. Jackson interpreted his lopsided reelection as a “decision of the people against the bank.” Having vetoed the charter renewal of the B.U.S., Jackson ordered the Treasury Department to transfer federal monies from the national bank to ­twenty-​­three mostly western state ­banks—​­called “pet banks” by Jackson’s critics because many were run by the president’s friends and allies. When the Treasury secretary balked, Jackson fired him.

 biddle’s response

 B.U.S. head Nicholas Biddle responded by ordering the bank to quit making loans and demanded that state banks exchange their paper currency for gold or silver coins as quickly as possible. Through such deflationary policies, the desperate Biddle was trying to bring the economy to a halt, create a depression, and thus reveal the importance of maintaining the national bank. An enraged Jackson said the B.U.S. under Biddle was “trying to kill me, but I will kill it!” Biddle’s plan to create a national financial crisis worked. Northern Democrats worried that the president’s “lawless and reckless” Bank War would ruin the party. But Jackson refused to flinch. When state bankers visited the White House to plead for relief, Jackson told them to go see Nicholas Biddle. “We have no money here, gentlemen. Biddle has all the money.” In the Senate, Calhoun and Clay led the fight against Jackson. They argued that Jackson’s transfer of government cash from the B.U.S. to the pet banks was illegal. On March 28, 1834, Clay convinced a majority in the Senate to censure

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 448

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 War over the B.U.S.  449

 Jackson for his actions, the only time a U.S. president has been reprimanded in this way as opposed to actual impeachment. Jackson was so angry about being censured that he wanted to challenge Clay to a duel so that he could “bring the rascal to a dear account.”

 the new whig party

 The president’s war on the bank led his opponents to create a new political party whose diverse members were unified by their hatred of Jackson. His critics claimed that he was ruling like a monarch; they dubbed him “King Andrew the First,” and called his Democratic supporters Tories. The new a­ nti-​­Jackson coalition called themselves Whigs, a name that linked them to the Patriots of the American Revolution (as well as to the parliamentary opponents of the Tories in Britain). Andrew Jackson preferred to call them Federalists. The Whig party grew directly out of the National Republican party led by John Quincy Adams, Henry Clay, and Daniel Webster. The Whigs also found support among the ­Anti-​­Masons and even some Democrats who resented Jackson’s war on the national bank. Of the ­forty-​­one Democrats in Congress who had voted against Jackson on rechartering the national bank, ­twenty-​ ­eight had joined the Whigs by 1836. The Whigs, like the National Republicans they replaced, were economic nationalists who wanted the federal government to promote manufacturing, support a national bank, and finance a national road network. In the South, the Whigs tended to be bankers and merchants. In the West, the Whigs were funded internal improvements. mostly farmers who valued g­overnment-​­ Unlike the Democrats, who attracted Catholic voters from Germany and Ire­ ative-​­born ­Protestants—​­Congregationalists, Presland, Whigs tended to be n byterians, Methodists, and ­Baptists—​­who advocated social reforms such as the abolition of slavery and efforts to restrict alcoholic beverages. For the next twenty years, the Whigs and the Democrats would be the two major political parties. In 1834, the editor of the Richmond Whig newspaper gave a c­ lass-​­based explanation of the Whig opposition to Jacksonian democracy. The Jacksonians, he wrote, have denounced “the rich and intelligent . . . as aristocrats. They have caressed, soothed, and flattered the heavy [larger] class of the poor and ignorant, because they held the power which they wanted.” By appealing to the masses, Jacksonians had overturned the republican system created by the founding fathers: “The Republic has degenerated into a Democracy!” In general, the Democrats, North and South, were solidly in support of slavery, while the Whigs were increasingly divided on the issue.

 killing the b.u.s.

 In the end, the relentless Jackson won his battle with Biddle’s Bank. The B.U.S. would shut down completely by 1841, and the

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 449

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 450  CHAPTER 10  The Jacksonian Era 1828–1840

 United States would not have a central banking system until 1914. Jackson exulted in his “glorious triumph” in killing the bank, “that mammoth of corruption and power” that could print the nation’s money. (Ironically, Jackson’s picture has been on the ­twenty-​­dollar bill since 1929). Jackson’s controversial efforts to destroy the B.U.S. aroused so much opposition that some of his congressional opponents talked of impeaching him. Jackson received so many death threats that he decided his political opponents were trying to kill him. In January 1835, the threat became real. After attending the funeral service for a member of Congress, Jackson was leaving the Capitol when an unemployed ­English-​­born housepainter named Richard Lawrence emerged from ­ eart—​­from only a few feet the shadows and pointed a pistol at the president’s h away. When Lawrence pulled the trigger, however, the gun misfired. Jackson lifted his walking stick and charged at the man, who pulled out another pistol, but it, too, miraculously misfired, enabling police to arrest him. Jackson assumed that his political foes, including John C. Calhoun, had planned the attack. A jury, however, decided that Lawrence, the first person to attempt the assassination of a U.S. president, was insane and ordered him confined in an asylum. The destruction of the B.U.S. illustrated Jackson’s strengths and weaknesses. When challenged, he was a shrewd and ferocious fighter. Yet his determination to humble Biddle and destroy the B.U.S. ended up hurting the national economy. The B.U.S. had performed a needed service. Without it, there was nothing to regulate the nation’s money supply or its banks. The number of banks across the nation more than doubled between 1829 and 1837. Of even greater concern, however, was that the amount of loans made by these unregulated banks quadrupled, preparing the way for a financial panic and a terrible depression. Jackson and the Democrats grew increasingly committed to the expansion of slavery westward into the Gulf coast states, driven by an unstable banking system. “People here are run mad with [land] speculation,” wrote a traveler through northern Mississippi. “They do business in a kind of frenzy.” Gold was scarce but paper money was plentiful, and people rushed to buy lands freed up by the removal of Indians. In 1835, federal land offices in Mississippi sold more acres than had been sold across the entire nation just three years before. The South and West were being flooded by cotton, credit (paper money), and slaves, all of which combined to produce mountains of debt. People used paper money issued by reckless state banks to buy and sell land and slaves. With the restraining effects of Biddle’s national bank removed, scores of new state banks sprouted like mushrooms in the cotton belt, each irresponsibly printing its own paper currency that was often lent recklessly to land

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 450

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 War over the B.U.S.  451

 s­ peculators and new businesses, especially in ­cotton-​­growing states like Mississippi and Louisiana. The result was chaos. Too many banks emerged without adequate capital and with inadequate expertise and integrity. As Senator Thomas Hart Benton, one of Jackson’s most loyal supporters, said in 1837, he had not helped his friend Jackson kill the B.U.S. to create a “wilderness of local banks. I did not join in putting down the paper currency of a national bank to put up a national paper currency of a thousand local banks.” But that is what happened.

 the money question During the 1830s, the federal government acquired huge amounts of money from the sale of g­ overnment-​­owned lands. Initially, the Treasury Department used the annual surpluses from land sales to pay down the accumulated federal debt, which it eliminated completely in 1835—the first time that any nation had done so. By 1836, the federal budget was generating an annual budget surplus, which led to intense discussions about what to do with the increasingly worthless paper money flowing into the Treasury’s vaults. The surge of unstable paper money peaked in 1836, when events combined to play havoc with the economy. Two key initiatives endorsed by the Jackson administration would devastate the nation’s financial system and throw the surging economy into a sudden tailspin. First, in June 1836, Congress approved the Distribution Act, initially proposed by Henry Clay and Daniel Webster, that required the federal government to “distribute” to the states surplus federal revenue from land sales. The federal surplus would be “deposited” into ­eighty-​­one state banks in proportion to each state’s representation in Congress. The state governments would then draw upon those deposits to fund roads, bridges, and other “internal” improvements, including the construction of new “public” schools free to everyone. Second, a month later, in July, Jackson issued the Specie Circular (1836), which announced that the federal government would accept only specie (gold or silver coins) in payment for land purchased by speculators (farmers could still pay with paper money). Westerners were upset by the Specie Circular because most of the government land sales were occurring in their states. They helped convince Congress to pass an act overturning Jackson’s policy. The president, however, vetoed it. Once enacted, the Deposit and Distribution Act and the Specie Circular put added strains on the nation’s already tight supplies of gold and silver. Eastern banks had to transfer much of their gold and silver reserves to western banks. As Eastern banks reduced their reserves of gold and silver coins, they

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 451

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 452  CHAPTER 10  The Jacksonian Era 1828–1840

New Method of Assorting the Mail, As Practised by S
 ­ outhern-​­Slave Holders, Or Attack on the Post Office, Charleston S.C. (1835) On the wall of the post office a sign reads “$20,000 Reward for Tappan,” referring to the bounty placed on the head of Arthur Tappan, founder and president of the American ­Anti-​­Slavery Society.

 had to reduce their lending. Soon, the o ­ nce-​­bustling economy began to slow into a recession as the money supply contracted and it proved much more difficult for individuals and businesses to get loans. Nervous depositors rushed to their local banks to withdraw their money, only to learn that there was not enough specie in their vaults to redeem their deposits.

 censoring the mail

 While concerns about the strength of the economy grew, slavery emerged again as a flashpoint issue. In 1835, northern organizations pushing for the immediate abolition of slavery began mailing ­anti-​­slavery pamphlets and newspapers to prominent white southerners, hoping to convince them to end the “peculiar institution.” They found little support. Francis Pickens of South Carolina urged southerners to stop the abolitionists from spreading their “lies.” Angry p ­ ro-​­slavery South Carolinians in Charleston broke into the federal post office, stole bags of the abolitionist mailings, and ceremoniously burned them. Southern state legislatures passed laws banning such “dangerous” publications. Jackson asked Congress to pass a

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 452

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 War over the B.U.S.  453

 federal censorship law that would prohibit “incendiary” materials intended to incite “the slaves to insurrection.” Congress took action in 1836, but instead of banning abolitionist materials, a bipartisan group of Democrats and Whigs reaffirmed the sanctity of the federal mail. As a practical matter, however, southern post offices began censoring the mail anyway, arguing that federal authority ended when the mail arrived at the post office door. Jackson decided not to enforce the congressional action. His failure of leadership created what would become a growing split in the Democratic party over the future of slavery. Some Democrats decided that Jackson, for all of his celebrations of democracy and equality, was no different from John C. Calhoun and other southern white racists. The controversy over the mails proved to be a victory for the growing abolitionist movement. One ­anti-​­slavery publisher said that instead of stifling their efforts, Jackson and the southern radicals “put us and our principles up before the ­world—​­just where we wanted to be.” Abolitionist groups started mailing their pamphlets and petitions to members of Congress. James Hammond, a ­pro-​­slavery South Carolinian, called for Congress to ban such a­ nti-​­slavery petitions. When that failed, Congress in 1836 adopted an informal solution suggested by Martin Van Buren: whenever a petition calling for the end of slavery was introduced, someone would immediately move that it be tabled rather than discussed. The plan, Van Buren claimed, would preserve the “harmony of our happy Union.” The supporters of this “gag rule” soon encountered a formidable obstacle in John Quincy Adams, the former president who now was a congressman from Massachusetts. He devised an array of procedures to get around the rule to squelch all a­ nti-​­slavery discussion. Henry Wise, a Virginia opponent, called Adams “the acutest, the astutest, the archest enemy of southern slavery that ever existed.” In the 1838–1839 session of Congress, thanks to Adams, some 1,500 ­anti-​­slavery petitions were filed with 163,845 signatures. Andrew Jackson dismissed Adams, his old rival, as “the most reckless and depraved man living.”

 the election of 1836

 In 1835, eighteen months before the presidential election, the Democrats nominated Jackson’s handpicked successor, Vice President Martin Van Buren. The Whig coalition, united chiefly in its opposition to Jackson, adopted a strategy of multiple candidates, hoping to throw the election into the House of Representatives. The Whigs put up three regional candidates: New Englander Daniel Webster, Hugh Lawson White of Tennessee, and William Henry Harrison of Indiana. But the multicandidate strategy failed. In the popular vote of 1836, Van Buren

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 453

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 454  CHAPTER 10  The Jacksonian Era 1828–1840

 defeated the entire Whig field, winning 170 electoral votes while the others combined to collect only 113.

 the eighth president

 Martin Van Buren was a skillful politician whose ability to organize and manipulate legislators had earned him the nickname “Little Magician.” Elected governor of New York in 1828, he had resigned to join Andrew Jackson’s cabinet, first as secretary of state, and then as vice president in 1833. Now, he Martin Van Buren Van Buren earned was the first New Yorker to be elected the nickname the “Little Magician,” not president. only for his short stature but also his Van Buren had been Jackson’s clos“magical” ability to exploit his political est political adviser and most trusted and social connections. ally, but many people considered him too ­self-​­centered to do the work of the people. John Quincy Adams wrote in his diary that Van Buren was “by far the ablest” of the Jacksonians, but that he had wasted “most of his ability upon mere personal intrigues. His principles are all subordinate to his ambition.” Van Buren’s rival, John C. Calhoun, was even more cutting. “He is not of the ­ rder—​­the fox.” race of the lion or the tiger.” Rather, he “belongs to a lower o At his inauguration, Van Buren promised to follow “in the footsteps” of the enormously popular President Jackson. Before he could do so, however, the nation’s financial sector began collapsing. On May 10, 1837, several large state banks in New York, running out of gold and silver, suddenly refused to convert customers’ paper money into coins. Other banks across the nation quickly did the same, creating a panic among depositors across the nation. More than a third of the banks went under. This financial crisis, the worst yet faced by the young nation, would become known as the Panic of 1837. It would soon mushroom into the country’s worst depression, lasting some seven years.

 the panic of 1837 The causes of the financial crisis went back to the Jackson administration, but Van Buren got the blame. The problem actually started in Europe. During the ­mid-​­1830s, Great Britain, America’s largest trading partner, experienced an acute financial crisis when the Bank of England, worried about a run on the gold and silver in its vaults, curtailed its loans. This

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 454

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 War over the B.U.S.  455

 forced most British companies to reduce their trade with America. As British demand for American cotton plummeted, so did the price paid for cotton. On top of everything else, in 1836 there had been a disastrous wheat crop. In the spring of 1836, Niles’ Weekly Register, the nation’s leading business journal, reported that the economy was “approaching a momentous crisis.” As creditors hastened to foreclose on businesses and farms unable to make their debt payments, government spending plunged. Many canals under construction were shut down. In many cases, state governments could not repay their debts. In the crunch, 40 percent of the hundreds of recently created state banks failed. In April 1837, some 250 businesses failed in New York City alone. By early fall, 90 percent of the nation’s factories had closed down. Not surprisingly, the economic crisis frightened people. As a newspaper editorial complained in December 1836, the economy “has been put into confusion and dismay by a ­well-​­meant, but extremely mistaken” pair of decisions by Congress and President Jackson: the Specie Circular and the elimination of the B.U.S. A ­well-​­managed national bank could have served as a stabilizing force amid the financial panic. Instead, weak state banks around the country flooded the economy with worthless paper money printed without adequate backing in gold or silver.

 Jacksonian Treasury note A parody of the ­often-​­worthless paper money (banknotes) issued by local banks and businesses in lieu of coins. These notes proliferated during the Panic of 1837, with the emergency suspension of gold and silver payments. In the main scene, Martin Van Buren, a monster on a wagon driven by John C. Calhoun, is about to pass through an arch labeled “Wall Street” and “Safety Fund Banks.”

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 455

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 456  CHAPTER 10  The Jacksonian Era 1828–1840

 Many desperate southerners fled their debts altogether by moving to Texas, which was then a province of Mexico. Even the federal government itself, having put most of its gold and silver in state banks, was verging on bankruptcy. The National Intelligencer newspaper in Washington, D.C., reported in May that the federal Treasury “has not a dollar of gold or silver in the world!” The poor, as always, were particularly hard hit. By the fall of 1837, one third of the nation’s workers were jobless, and those still fortunate enough to be employed had their wages cut by 30 to 50 percent within two years. At the same time, prices for food and clothing soared. As the winter of 1837 approached, a New York City journalist reported that 200,000 people were “in utter and hopeless distress with no means of surviving the winter but those provided by charity.” The nation had a “­poverty-​­struck feeling.”

 politics amid the depression

 The unprecedented economic calamity would last seven years and send shock waves through the political system. Critics among the Whigs called the president “Martin Van Ruin” because he did not believe that he nor the federal government had any responsibility to rescue ­hard-​­pressed farmers, bankers, or businessmen, or to provide relief for the jobless and homeless. Any efforts to help people in distress must come from the states, not the national government. He did call a special session of Congress in 1837, which canceled the distribution of the federal surplus to the states because there was no surplus to distribute. How best to deal with the unprecedented depression clearly divided Democrats from Whigs. Unlike Van Buren, Whig Henry Clay insisted that suffering people were “entitled to the protecting care of a parental Government.” To him, an enlarged role for the federal government was the price of a maturing, expanding republic in which elected officials had an obligation to promote the “safety, convenience, and prosperity” of the people. Van Buren and the Democrats believed that the government had no such obligations. Henry Clay, among others, savaged the president for his “cold and heartless” attitude.

 an independent treasury Van Buren believed that the federal government should stop risking its cash deposits in the insecure “pet” state banks that Jackson had selected. Instead, he wanted to establish an Independent Treasury system whereby the government would keep its funds in its own vaults and do business entirely in gold or silver, not paper currency. Van Buren wanted the federal government to regulate the nation’s supply of gold and silver and let the marketplace regulate the supply of paper currency. It took Van Buren more than three years to convince Congress to pass the Independent Treasury Act on July 4, 1840. Although it lasted little more

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 456

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 War over the B.U.S.  457

 than a year (the Whigs repealed it in 1841), it would be restored in 1846. Van Buren’s Independent Treasury was a political disaster. Not surprisingly, the state banks that lost control of the federal funds howled in protest. Moreover, it did ­nothing to end the widespread suffering caused by the deepening depression.

 the 1840 campaign By 1840, an election year, the Van Buren administration and the Democrats were in deep trouble. The continuing hot potato of Texas produced considerable damage. In 1837, Van Buren had decided not to annex the Republic of Texas, claiming that there was no provision in the Constitution for absorbing another nation and that doing so

THE ELECTION OF 1840

 NH 7 VT 7

OREGON COUNTRY IOWA TERR.

WI TERR.

UNORGANIZED TERRITORY MO
Disputed area REPUBLIC OF TEXAS 
AR LA

 NY

 MI

 IL

 IN

 OH

 KY 15 TN 15 MS

 AL

PA VA

SC GA 11

ME MA 14

 RI 4 CT 8 NJ 8 DE 3 MD 10

 NC

FLORIDA TERRITORY

Electoral Vote


Popular Vote


William Henry Harrison (Whig)




1,275,000


Martin Van Buren (Democrat)




1,128,000


 Why did Van Buren carry several western states but few others? How did the Whigs achieve a decisive electoral victory over the Democrats? ■ How was the Whig strategy in 1840 different from their campaign in 1836? WWN64 ■ ■

Figure M10_2
 First proof 31p0 x 25p0

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 457

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 458  CHAPTER 10  The Jacksonian Era 1828–1840

 would also t­ rigger a war with Mexico. Van Buren’s decision outraged his political mentor, Andrew Jackson, and aroused strong criticism among southern Democrats. At the same time, the depression continued to deepen and the suffering spread, leading Whigs to grow confident they could win the presidency. At their nominating convention, they passed over Henry Clay, the celebrated Kentucky legislator who had been Jackson’s consistent foe, in favor of William Henry Harrison, whose credentials were impressive: victor at the Battle of Tippecanoe against Tecumseh’s Shawnees in 1811, former governor of the Indiana Territory, and former congressman and senator from Ohio. To balance the ticket geographically, the Whigs nominated John Tyler of Virginia as their vice president. Henry Clay, who yearned to be president, was bitterly disappointed, complaining that “my friends are not worth the powder and shot it would take to kill them. I am the most unfortunate man in the history of parties.”

 Uncle Sam’s Pet Pups! A woodcut showing William Henry Harrison luring “Mother Bank,” Andrew Jackson, and Martin Van Buren into a barrel of hard (alcoholic) cider. While Jackson and Van Buren sought to destroy the Bank of the United States, Harrison promised to reestablish it, hence his providing “Mother Bank” a refuge in this scene.

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 458

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 Jackson’s Legacy  459

 The Whigs refused to take a stand on major issues. They did, however, seize upon a catchy campaign slogan: “Tippecanoe and Tyler Too.” When a Democratic newspaper declared that General Harrison was the kind of man who would spend his retirement “in a log cabin [sipping apple cider] on the banks of the Ohio [River],” the Whigs chose the cider and log cabin symbols to depict Harrison as a simple man sprung from the people in contrast to Van Buren’s aristocratic lifestyle. (Harrison was actually from one of Virginia’s wealthiest families). Harrison defeated Van Buren easily, winning 234 electoral votes to 60. The Whigs had promised a return to prosperity without explaining how it would happen. It was simply time for a change. What was most remarkable about the election of 1840 was the turnout. More than 80 percent of white American men voted, many for the first t­ ime—​ ­the highest turnout before or since, as by this time almost every state had dropped property qualifications for voting.

 Jackson’s Legacy The nation that the new p ­ resident-​­elect William Henry Harrison prepared to govern was vastly different from the one led by George Washington and twenty-​­ four states Thomas Jefferson. In 1828, the United States boasted ­ and nearly 13 million people, many of them recent arrivals from Germany and Ireland. The national population was growing at a phenomenal rate, doubling every ­twenty-​­three years. During the ­so-​­called Jacksonian era, the unregulated economy witnessed booming industrialization, rapidly growing cities, rising tensions between the North and South over slavery, accelerating westward expansion, and the emergence of the second ­two-​­party system, this time featuring Democrats and Whigs. A surge in foreign demand for southern cotton and other American goods, along with substantial British investment in an array of new American enterprises, helped fuel an economic boom and a transportation revolution. That ­President-​­elect Jackson rode to his inauguration in a ­horse-​­drawn carriage and left Washington, D.C. eight years later on a train symbolized the dramatic changes occurring in American life.

 a new political landscape

 A transformational figure in a transformational era, Andrew Jackson helped reshape the American political landscape. Even his ferocious opponent, Henry Clay, acknowledged that Jackson had “swept over the Government . . . like a tropical tornado.”

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 459

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 460  CHAPTER 10  The Jacksonian Era 1828–1840

 Like all great presidents, however, Jackson left a mixed legacy. Yes, he helped accelerate the democratization of American life. In his 1837 farewell address, he stressed his crusade on behalf of “the farmer, the mechanic, and the laboring classes of ­society—​­the bone and sinew of the ­country—​­men who love liberty and desire nothing but equal rights and equal laws.” Jackson championed opportunities for the “common man” to play a greater role in the political arena at the same time that working men were forming labor unions to increase their economic power and political clout. He helped establish the modern Democratic party and attracted to it the working poor and immigrants from eastern cities, as well as farmers from the South and East. Through a nimble combination of force and compromise, he saved the Union by suppressing the nullification crisis. And, with great fanfare on January 1, 1835, Jackson announced that the government had paid off the national debt accumulated since the Revolutionary War, which he called a “national curse.” It was the first time in history that a nation had eliminated a large debt. The Washington Globe celebrated the momentous occasion by noting that it coincided with the twentieth anniversary of the Battle of New Orleans, writing that “New Orleans and the National ­Debt—​­the first of which paid off our scores to our enemies, whilst the latter paid off the last cent to our friends.” Jackson’s concept of “the people,” however, was limited to a “white men’s democracy,” as it had been for all earlier presidents, and the phenomenon of Andrew Jackson, the heroic symbol of the common man and the democratic ideal, continues to spark historical debate, as it did during his own lifetime. In 1828, William P. Anderson, a former army officer who had been one of Jackson’s Tennessee ­horse-​­racing friends and political supporters but had turned into an outspoken opponent, wrote an open letter to the presidential candidate that was published in several newspapers. He attacked Jackson for having killed a man in a duel, then brutally outlined Old Hickory’s faults: “Your besetting sins are ambition and the love of money. . . . You are naturally and constitutionally irritable, overbearing and tyrannical. . . . When you become the enemy of any man, you will put him down if you can, no matter by what means, fair or foul. . . . You are miserably deficient in principle, and have seldom or never had power without abusing it.” Although the criticism was too harsh, it contained more than a grain of truth. Jackson was so convinced of the rightness and righteousness of his ideals that he was selectively willing to defy constitutional limits on his authority when it suited his interests and satisfied his rage. He was both the instrument of democracy and its enemy, protecting “the humble people” and the Union by expanding presidential authority in ways that the founders had never envi-

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 460

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 Jackson’s Legacy  461

 sioned, including removing federal money from the national bank, replacing government officials with party loyalists, censoring the mails, and ending nullification in South Carolina. Jackson often declared that the only justification for using governmental power was to ensure equal treatment for everyone, the “high and the low, the rich and the poor.” Yet his own use of government force was at times contradictory and even hypocritical. While threatening to “kill” the B.U.S. and hang John Calhoun and other South Carolina nullifiers, he refused to intervene when Georgia officials violated the legal rights of Cherokees. His aggressive use of presidential authority was less principled than it was political and personal. His inconsistent approach to executive power both symbolized and aggravated the perennial tension in the American republic between a commitment to democratic ideals and the exercise of presidential authority.

 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 461

24/10/15 1:52 PM


CHAPTER REVIEW
Summary • 
 Jackson’s Views and Policies The Jacksonians sought to democratize the political process and expand economic opportunity for the “common man” (that is, “poor and humble” white men). As the representative of “the people,” Andrew Jackson expanded the role of the president in economic matters, reducing federal spending and eliminating the powerful Second Bank of the United States. His Bank War painted the national bank as full of “vipers and thieves” and was hugely popular, but Jackson did not understand its ­long-​­term economic consequences. In addition, his views on limited government were not always reflected in his policies. He left the high taxes from the Tariff of Abominations (1828) in place until opposition in the South created a national crisis.

•


 Indian Removal Act of 1830 The Indian Removal Act of 1830 authorized the relocation of Eastern Indians to federal lands west of the Mississippi River. The Cherokees used the federal court system to try to block this relocation. Despite the Supreme Court’s decisions in their favor, President Jackson forced them to move; the event and the route they took came to be known as the Trail of Tears. By 1840, only a few Seminoles and Cherokees remained in remote areas of the Southeast.

•


 Nullification Controversy The concept of nullification, developed by South Carolina’s John C. Calhoun, enabled a state to disavow a federal law. When a South Carolina convention nullified the Tariffs of 1828 and 1832, Jackson requested that Congress pass a Force Bill authorizing the U.S. Army to compel compliance with the tariffs. After South Carolina, under the threat of federal military force, accepted a compromise tariff put forth by Henry Clay, the state convention nullified the Force Bill. The immediate crisis was over, with both sides claiming victory.

•


 Democrats and Whigs Jackson’s arrogant behavior, especially his use of the veto, led many to regard him as “King Andrew the First.” Groups who opposed him coalesced into a new party, known as the Whigs, thus producing the country’s ­second ­two-​­party system. Two ­acts—​­the Distribution Act and the Specie ­Circular—​ ­ultimately destabilized the nation’s economy. Jackson’s ally and vice president, Martin Van Buren, succeeded him as president, but Jacksonian bank policies led to the financial Panic of 1837 and an economic depression. Van Buren responded by establishing an Independent Treasury to safeguard the nation’s economy but offered no help for individuals in distress. The economic calamity ensured a Whig victory in the election of 1840.

•


 The Jackson Years Andrew Jackson’s America was very different from the America of 1776. Most white men had gained the vote, but political equality did



 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 462

24/10/15 1:52 PM


 not mean economic equality. Jacksonian Democrats wanted every American to have an equal chance to compete in the marketplace and in the political arena, but they never promoted equality of results. Inequality between rich and poor widened during the Jacksonian era.

Chronology














1837–1838




 Tariff of Abominations goes into effect Congress passes the Indian Removal Act Andrew Jackson vetoes the Maysville Road Bill Supreme Court issues Cherokee Nation v. Georgia decision Supreme Court issues Worcester v. Georgia decision South Carolina passes Ordinance of Nullification Andrew Jackson vetoes the Bank Recharter Bill Congress passes the Force Bill, authorizing military force in South Carolina Congress passes Henry Clay’s compromise tariff with Jackson’s support Democratic candidate Martin Van Buren is elected president Financial panic deflates the economy Eastern Indians are forced west on the Trail of Tears Independent Treasury established Whig candidate William Henry Harrison is elected president

Key Terms
Indian Removal Act (1830) p. 430


Force Bill (1833) p. 447


Trail of Tears (1838–1839) p. 435


Whigs p. 449


Second Bank of the United States
 p. 435

Distribution Act (1836) p. 451


Bank War p. 437
Tariff of Abominations (1828) p. 439


Independent Treasury Act (1840)
 p. 456

 nullification p. 439

 second ­two-​­party system p. 459

Panic of 1837 p. 454


IJK
Go to InQuizitive to see what you’ve learned—and learn what you’ve missed—with personalized feedback along the way. 


 213003_10_422-463_r4_th.indd 463

24/10/15 1:52 PM




The South,
­Slavery, and
King Cotton
1800–1860


 The Old South One of the enduring myths of the Old South is captured in this late ­nineteenth-​­century painting of a plantation on the Mississippi River: muscular slaves tending the lush cotton fields, a steamboat easing down the wide river, and the planter’s family relaxing in the cool shade of their ­white-​­columned mansion. Novels and films like Gone with the Wind (1939) would perpetuate the notion of the Old South as a stable, paternalistic agrarian society led by white planters who were the “natural” aristocracy of virtue and talent within their communities.

O


 f all the regions of the United States during the first half of the nineteenth century, the p ­ re–​­Civil War Old South was the most distinctive. What had once been a narrow band of settlements along the Atlantic coast dramatically expanded westward and southward to form a subcontinental empire rooted in cotton. The southern states remained rural and agricultural long after the rest of the nation had embraced cities, immigrants, and factories. Yet the Old South was also instrumental in enabling the nation’s capitalist development and its growing economic stature. After the War of 1812, s­outhern-​­grown cotton became the key raw material driving industrial growth, feeding the textile mills of Great Britain and New England, where wage workers toiling over ­newly-​­invented machines fashioned it into thread, yarn, and clothing. The price of raw cotton doubled in the first year after the war, and the profits made by cotton producers flowed into the hands of northern and British bankers, merchants, and textile mill owners. Investors in Boston, New York City, and Philadelphia provided loans to southerners to buy more land and more slaves. Northerners also provided the cotton industry with other essential needs: insurance, financing, and shipping. The story of how southern cotton clothed the world, spurred the expansion of global capitalism, and transformed history was woven with the threads of tragedy, however. The revolution spawned by the mass production of cotton was rooted in the explosive expansion of slavery across the South and into Texas, as Native Americans were pushed off their ancestral lands and ­relocated

 focus questions 1. What factors made the South distinct from the rest of the United States during the early nineteenth century? 2. What role did cotton production and slavery play in the South’s economic and social development?

 3. What were the major social groups within southern white society? Why was each group committed to the continuation and expansion of slavery? 4. What was the impact of slavery on African Americans, both free and enslaved, throughout the South?

 5. How did enslaved peoples respond to the inhumanity of their situation?



