Chapter 22
The Civil War
What factors and events influenced the outcome of the Civil War?
SJSil
BMM8
22.1 Introduction
The Confederate bombardment of Fort Sumter in Charleston, South Carolina, ended months of confusion. The nation was at war. The time had come to choose sides. For most whites in the South, the choice was dear. Early in 1861, representatives from six of the seven states that had seceded from the Union met to form a new nation called the Confederate States of America. Southerners believed that just as the states had once voluntarily joined the Union, they could voluntarily leave it now. The men who fought for the South were proud defenders of Southern independence.
For many Northerners, the choice was just as clear. “There can be no neutrals in this war,” declared Senator Stephen Douglas after the attack of Fort Sumter, “only patriots—or traitors” Most Northerners viewed the secession of Southern states as a traitorous act of rebellion against the United States. They marched off to war eager to defend what they saw as their union, their constitution, and their flag.
Choosing sides was harder for the eight slave states located between the Confederacy and the free states. Four of these so-called border states—Virginia, Arkansas, Tennessee, and North Carolina— joined the Confederacy. The western counties of Virginia, however, remained loyal to the Union. Rather than fight for the South, they broke away to form a new state called West Virginia. The other four border states—Delaware, Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri—remained in the Union, although many of their citizens fought for the South.
As Americans took sides, they began to see why a civil war a conflict between two groups of citizens in one country—is the most painful kind of war. This conflict divided not only states, but also families and friends. In this chapter, you will learn how this brothers war turned into the most destructive of all American wars. As you read, put yourself in the shoes of the soldiers and civilians who were part of this long and tragic struggle.
The Civil War divided Americans into two opposing nations. Union solriiArs /left) fnnnht fellow Americans and Confederate soldiers (right).
More soldiers died during the Civil War than in all other U.S. wars combined. Here, some of the dead lay where they fell on the battlefield. The Civil War claimed the lives of more than 620,000 Union and Confederate soldiers.
The Civil War 42
I
The North and the South had different strengths at the beginning of the war. The North had far more factories and railroad lines (left). The South had better military leadership (right).
22.2 North Versus South
President Abraham Lincoln’s response to the attack on Fort Sumter was quick and clear. He called for 75,000 volunteers to come forward to preserve the Union. At the same time, Jefferson Davis, the newly elected president of the Confederacy, called for volunteers to defend the South. For the first time, Americans were fighting a civil war.

Strengths and Weaknesses of the North The North began the war with impressive strengths. Its population was about 22 million, compared to the South’s 9 million. The North was both richer and more technologically advanced than the South. About 90 percent of the nation’s manufacturing, and most of its banks, were in the North.
The North had geographic advantages, too. It had more farms than the South to provide food for troops. Its land contained most of the country s iron, coal, copper, and gold. The North controlled the seas, and its 21,000 miles of railroad track allowed troops and supplies to be transported wherever they were needed.
The North s greatest weakness was its military leadership. At the start of the war, about one-third of the nation’s military officers resigned and returned to their homes in the South. During much of the war, Lincoln searched for effective generals who could lead the Union
Confederacy another name for the Confederate States of America, made up of the 11 states that seceded from the Union
civil war a war between opposing groups of citizens from the same country
~-------- daftnesses of the South In contrast to the
North, the South s great strength was its military leadership. Most of America s best military officers were Southerners who chose to fight for the Confederacy. This was not an easy decision for many of them. Colonel Robert E. Lee, for example, was not a supporter of either slavery or secession. But he decided that he could not fight against his native Virginia. Lee resigned from the U.S. Army to become commander in chief of the Confederate forces.
424 Chapter 22
The South had geographic advantages as well. To win the war, the North would have to invade and conquer the South. The sheer size of the South made this a daunting task. The South, in contrast, could win simply by defending its territory until Northerners grew tired of fighting.
The South did have an important geographic disadvantage. If the Union could control the Mississippi River, it could split the Confed-eracy in two.
The South’s main weaknesses were its economy and its transportation systems. The region’s agriculturally based economy could not support a long war. It had few factories to produce guns and other military supplies. The Confederacy also faced serious transportation problems. The South lacked the railroads needed to haul troops or supplies over long distances.
Abraham Lincoln versus Jefferson Davis The North’s greatest advantage was its newly elected president, Abraham Lincoln. Through even the darkest days of the war, Lincoln never wavered from his belief that the Union was perpetual—never to be broken. Throughout his presidency, Lincoln related the preservation of the Union to the ideals of the American Revolution. In his first inaugural address, he said that the Union was begun by the American Revolution, “matured and continued” by the Declaration of Independence, and affirmed by the Constitution.
At the time of the secession crisis, Jefferson Davis was a U.S. senator from Mississippi. A firm believer in states’ rights, he resigned his seat in the Senate when Mississippi left the Union. Like Lincoln, Davis often spoke of the American Revolution. When Southerners formed their own government, Davis said in his inaugural address, they 'merely asserted a right which the Declaration of Independence of 1776 had defined to be inalienable.” He believed the South was fighting for the same freedom cherished by the nation s founders.
Abraham Lincoln (left) and Jefferson Davis (right) atthe start of the Civil War
!
The Civil War
22.3 Bull Run: A Great Awakening
In the spring of 1861, President Lincoln and General Winfield Scott planned the Union’s war strategy. Step one was to surround the South by sea to cut off its trade. Step two was to divide the Confederacy into sections so that one region could not help another. Step three was to capture Richmond, Virginia, the capital of the Confederacy, and destroy the Confederate government. Journalists called this strategy the Anaconda Plan because it resembled the crushing death grip of an anaconda snake.
Rose Greenhow's Dilemma Most Northern ers believed that the war could be won with a single Union assault on Richmond. In 1861, thousands of volunteers poured into Washington, D.C., shouting, “On to Richmond!” A young widow and Washington social leader named Rose O’Neal Greenhow watched these eager troops carefully.
Greenhow was a strong supporter of the Southern cause. She used her friendship with government officials to learn just when and how the Union planned to attack Richmond. Her challenge was to find a way to deliver this information to Confederate leaders without being discovered.
The Battle of Bull Run On a hot July morning, long lines of Union soldiers marched out of Washington heading for Richmond. Their voices could be heard singing and cheering across the countryside. Parties of civilians followed the army, adding to the excitement. They had come along to see the end of the rebellion.
The troops would not have been so cheerful had they known what was waiting for them at Manassas, a small town on the way to Richmond. Greenhow had managed to warn Southern military leaders of Union plans. She had smuggled a coded note to them in a young girl s curls. Southern troops were waiting for the Union forces as they approached Manassas. The two armies met at a creek known as Bull Run.
Rose Greenhow is pictured here with her daughter. Greenhow collected valuable information about Union plans to attack Richmond and passed it on to Confederate leaders through a coded message like the one shown above.
At first, a Union victory looked certain. But Confederate general Thomas Jackson and his regiment of Virginians refused to give up. “Look,” shouted South Carolma general Bernard Bee to his men, “there is Jackson with his irgimans, standing like a stone wall.” Thus inspired by “Stonewall” ™ VTT’ C°nfederate lines held firm until reinforcements as thev C 1 at afternoon> Jackson urged his men to “yell like furies pertenced'T	U"iOn	charge overwhelmed the tnex-
mon troops, who fled in panic back to Washington.
426 Chapter 22
The Battle of Bull Run was a smashing victory for the South.
For the North, it was a shocking blow. Lincoln and his generals now realized that ending the war would not be easy.
Women Support the War Over the next year, both the North and the South worked to build and train large armies. As men went off to war, women took their places on the home front. Wives and mothers supported their families by running farms and businesses. Many women went to work for the first time in factories. Others found jobs as nurses, teachers, or government workers.
Women also served the military forces on both sides as messengers, guides, scouts, smugglers, soldiers, and spies. Greenhow was arrested for spying shortly after the Battle of Bull Run. Although she was kept under guard in her Washington home, she continued to smuggle military secrets to the Confederates. The following year, Greenhow was allowed to move to the South, where President Jefferson Davis welcomed her as a hero.
Women also volunteered to tend sick and wounded soldiers. Dorothea Dix was already well known for her efforts to improve the treatment of the mentally ill. She was appointed director of the Union army s nursing service. Dix insisted that all female nurses be over 30 years old, plain in appearance, physically strong, and willing to do unpleasant work. Her rules were so strict that she was known as Dragon Dix.
While most nurses worked in military hospitals, Clara Barton followed Union armies into battle, tending troops where they fell. Later generations would remember Barton as the founder of the American Red Cross. To the soldiers she cared for during the war, she was the angel of the battlefield.”
During the Civil War, many women went to work in factories, such as the munitions plant illustrated here. The women replaced men who were away fighting.
22.4 Antietam: A Bloody Affair
The Battle of Bull Run ended Northerners’ hopes for a quick victory. In the months that followed that sobering defeat, the Union began to carry out the Anaconda Plan.
The Anaconda Plan in Action Step one of the Anaconda Plan was to blockade the South’s ports and cut off its trade. In 1861, the
„ J xl_1_ 1	1	1 n . 1	,	- .
anu lul un ns iraae. in 1001, me
Union navy launched the blockade. By the end of the year, most ports in the South were closed to foreign ships. The South had long exported its cotton to Great Britain and France. The Confederacy looked to Great Britain to send ships to break through the blockade. The British, however, refused this request. As a result, the South could not export cotton to Europe or import needed supplies.
Early in 1862, the Union began to put step two of the Anaconda an into action. The strategy was to divide the Confederacy by gaining control of the Mississippi River. In April, Union admiral David arragut led 46 ships up the Mississippi River to New Orleans. This was the largest American fleet ever assembled. In the face of such overwhelming force, the city surrendered without firing a shot, eanw lie, Union forces headed by General Ulysses S. Grant egan moving south toward the Mississippi from Illinois. In 1862,
° j 3 STeTrieS V^ctor'es ^at put Kentucky and much of Ten-Crant f ni°n contr°l- A general of remarkable determination, or total 6 accePt any battle outcome other than unconditional,
as “Uncondv"	F°r thlS reason’ U- S- Grant was known to his men
as Unconditional Surrender” Grant.
shir> to^Vnt.186^ X™ general George McClellan sent 100,000 men by
Sp£ X ,	uni Aga,n'a Uni“ «°ry —<<	“
tack in a serie-Tfered> Confederate forces stopped the Unionat-n 3 SeneS of ^11-fought battles. Once more, Richmond was saved.
commander oftheTo 7 7 A‘tWS P°im' G“eral Robert E' 'h' his troops a Jo ' ,he ed£ra,e for“s' did th'	H«”'
otomac River into Maryland, a slave state that
428 Chapter 22
remained in the Union. Lee hoped this show of strength might persuade Maryland to join the Confederacy. He also hoped that a Confederate victory on Union soil would convince European nations to support the South.
On a crisp September day in 1862, Confederate and Union armies met near the Maryland town of Sharpsburg along Antietam Creek. All daylong, McClellan’s troops pounded Lee’s badly outnumbered forces. The following day, Lee retreated to Virginia.
McClellan claimed Antietam as a Union victory. But many who fought there saw the battle as a defeat for both armies. Of the 75,000 Union troops who fought at Antietam, about 2,100 were killed. About 10,300 were wounded or missing. Of the 52,000 Confederates who fought at Antietam, about 2,770 lost their lives, while 11,000 were wounded or missing. In that single day of fighting, more Americans were killed than in the War of 1812 and the Mexican War combined. The Battle of Antietam was the bloodiest day of the war.
The New Realities of War The horrifying death toll at Antietam reflected the new realities of warfare. In past wars, battles had been fought in hand-to-hand combat using bayonets. During the Civil War, improved weapons made killing from a distance much easier. Rifles, which replaced muskets, were accurate over long distances. Improved cannons and artillery also made it easier for armies to attack forces some distance away. As a result, armies could meet, fight, die, and part without either side winning a clear victory.
Medical care was not as advanced as weaponry. Civil War doctors had no understanding of the causes of infections. Surgeons operated in dirty hospital tents with basic instruments. Few bothered to wash their hands between patients. As a result, infections spread rapidly from patient to patient. The hospital death rate was so high that soldiers often refused medical care.
An injured Ohio soldier wrote that he chose to return to battle rather than see a doctor, “thinking that I had better die by rebel bullets than Union quackery [unskilled medical care].”
As staggering as the battle death tolls were, far more soldiers died of diseases than wounds. Unsanitary conditions in army camps were so bad that about three men died of typhoid, pneumonia, and other diseases for every one who died in battle. As one soldier observed, “these big battles [are] not as bad as the fever.”
Medical care was shockingly poor during the Civil War. Thousands of soldiers died from infections or diseases. Nevertheless, nurses performed heroically as they cared forthe sick and wounded.
22.5 Gettysburg: A Turning Point
While neither side won the battle of Antietam, it was enough of a victory for Lincoln to take his first steps toward ending slavery. When the Civil War began, Lincoln had resisted pleas from abolitionists to make emancipation, or the freeing of slaves, a reason for fighting the Confederacy. He himself opposed slavery. But the purpose of the war, he said, “is to save the Union, and is not either to save or destroy slavery.”
In this illustration, slaves waitfor the Emancipation Proclamation. While the proclamation had little immediate effect, it meantthe Union was now fighting to end slavery.
The Emancipation Proclamation As the war dragged on, Lincoln changed his mind. He decided to make abolition a goal of the Union. Lincoln realized that European nations that opposed slavery would never support the side that did not want slavery to end. Freeing slaves could also deprive the Confederacy of a large part of its workforce.
On January 1, 1863, President Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation. The proclamation, or formal order, declared slaves in all Confederate states to be free. This announcement had little immediate effect on slavery. The Confederate states ignored the document. Slaves living in states loyal to the Union were not affected by the proclamation.
Still, for many in the North, the Emancipation Proclamation changed the war into a crusade for freedom. The Declaration of Independence had said that “all men are created equal.” Now the fight was about living up to those words.
Emancipation Proclamation
an order issued by President Lincoln on January 1, 1863, declaring slaves in the Confederate states to be free
The Battle of Gettysburg In the summer of 1863, Lee felt confident enough to risk another invasion of the North. He hoped to capture a Northern city and help convince the weary North to seek peace
Union and Confederate troops met on July 1, 1863, west of Gettysburg, Pennsylvania. The Union troops, about 90,000 strong, were led by newly appointed General George C. Meade. After a brief skirmish, they occupied four miles of high ground along an area known as Cem etery Ridge. About a mile to the west, some 75,000 Confederate troop! gathered behind Seminary Ridge.
The following day, the Confederates attempted to find weak spots ir the Union position. The Union lines held firm. On the third day, Lee or dered an all-out attack on the center of the Union line. Cannons filled the air with smoke and thunder. George Pickett led 15,000 Confederate soldiers in a charge across the low ground separating the two forces.
Pickett s charge marked the northernmost point reached by Southern troops during the war. But as Confederate troops pressed forward, Union gunners opened great holes in their advancing lines. Those mei who managed to make their way to Cemetery Ridge were struck down by Union soldiers in hand-to-hand combat.
Although Gettysburg was a victory for the Union, the losses on both sides were staggering. More than 17,500 Union soldiers and 23>00(
on ederate troops were killed or wounded in three days of battle, ee, who lost about a third of his army, withdrew to Virginia. From is point on, he would only wage a defensive war on Southern soil.
430 Chapter 22
Opposition on the Union Home Front Despite the victory at Gettysburg, Lincoln faced a number of problems on the home front.
One was opposition to the war itself. A group of Northern Democrats were more interested in restoring peace than in saving the Union or ending slavery. Republicans called these Democrats “Copperheads after a poisonous snake with that name.
Other Northerners opposed the war because they were sympathetic to the Confederate cause. When a proslavery mob attacked Union soldiers marching through Maryland, Lincoln sent in troops to keep order. He also used his constitutional power to temporarily suspend the right of habeas corpus. During the national emergency, citizens no longer had the right to appear before a court to face charges. People who were suspected of disloyalty were jailed without being charged for a crime.
Lincoln's Gettysburg Address In 1863, President Lincoln traveled to Gettysburg. Thousands of the men who died there had been buried in a new cemetery. Lincoln was among those invited to speak at the dedication of this new burial ground. The nation would never
forget Lincoln s Gettysburg Address.
The president deliberately spoke of the war in words that echoed the Declaration of Independence. The “great civil war,” he said, was testing whether a nation “conceived in liberty, and dedicated to t e proposition that all men are created equal... can long endure He spoke of the brave men, “living and dead, who had fought to„ e en that ideal. “The world... can never forget what they did here. Finally, he called on Americans to remain
dedicated to the great task remaining before us-that from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion-that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain that nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom-and that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth.
On July 3,1863, General George Pickett led 15,000 Confederate troops in a charge against the Union lines. Row after row of Confederate soldiers fell under a rain of bullets until they finally retreated.
habeas corpus the right of an accused person to appear in court so a judge can determine whether he or she is being imprisoned lawfully
Gettysburg Address a speech by President Abraham Lincoln in 1863 at the site of the Battle of Gettysburg in memory of the Union soldiers who had died trying to protect the ideals of freedom upon which the nation was founded
The Civil War 43^
22.6	Vicksburg: A Besieged City
The Civil War was a war of many technological firsts. It was the first American war to use railroads to move troops and to keep them supplied. It was the first war in which telegraphs were used to communicate with distant armies. It was the first conflict to be recorded in photographs. It was also the first to see combat between armor-plated steamships.
The Merrimac and the Monitor Early in the war, Union forces withdrew from the navy yard in Norfolk, Virginia. They left behind a warship named the Merrimac. The Confederacy began the war with no navy. They covered the wooden Merrimac with iron plates and added a powerful ram to its prow.
In response, the Union navy built its own ironclad ship called the Monitor. Completed in less than 100 days, the Monitor had a flat deck and two heavy guns in a revolving turret. It was said to resemble a “cheese box on a raft.”
In March 1862, the Merrimac, which the Confederates had renamed the Virginia, steamed into Chesapeake Bay to attack Union ships. With cannonballs harmlessly bouncing off its sides, the iron monster destroyed three wooden ships and threatened the entire Union blockade fleet.
The next morning, the Vir-;	ginia was met by the Monitor.
The two ironclads exchanged shots for hours before withdrawing. Neither could claim victory, and neither was harmed.
The battle of the Merrimac and the Monitor showed that iron-clad ships were superior to wooden vessels. After that, both sides added ironclads to their navies. The South, however, was never able to build enough ships to end the Union blockade of Southern harbors.
In 1862, the Monitor and the Merrimac, two iron-clad ships, fought to a standstill. The battle signaled the end of wooden warships.
Control of the Mississippi Ironclads were part of the Unions campaign to divide the South by taking control of the Mississippi River-After seizing New Orleans in 1862, Admiral David Farragut moved up the Mississippi to capture the cities of Baton Rouge and Natchez. At the same time, other Union ships gained control of Memphis, Tennessee.
The Union now controlled both ends of the Mississippi. The South could no longer move men or supplies up and down the river. But neither could the North, as long as the Confederates continued to control one key location—Vicksburg, Mississippi.
432 Chapter 22
The Siege of Vicksburg The
town of Vicksburg was located on a bluff above a hairpin turn in the Mississippi River. The city was easy to defend and difficult to capture. Whoever held Vicksburg could, with a few well-placed cannons, control movement along the Mississippi. But even Farragut had to admit with fellow officer David Porter that ships “cannot crawl up hills 300 feet high.” An army would be needed to take Vicksburg.
In May 1863, General Ulysses S.
Grant battled his way to Vicksburg with the needed army. For six weeks,
Union gunboats shelled the city from the river while Grant s army bombarded it from land. Slowly but surely, the Union troops burrowed toward the city in trenches and tunnels.
As shells pounded the city, people in Vicksburg dug caves into the hillsides for protection. To survive, they ate horses, mules, and bread made of corn and dried peas. “It had the properties of Indian rubber,” said one Confederate soldier, “and was worse than leather to digest.”
Low on food and supplies, Vicksburg surrendered on July 4, 1863. The Mississippi was now a Union waterway, and the Confederacy was cut in two.
For more than a month, Union forces bom barded Vicksburg with an average of 2,800 shells a day. Forced to eat horses, mules, dogs, and rats, the Confederates finally surrendered.
Problems on the Confederate Home Front As the war raged on, life in the South became grim. Because of the blockade, imported goods disappeared from stores. What few items were available were extremely expensive.
Unable to sell their tobacco and cotton to the North or to other countries, farmers planted food crops instead. Still, the South was often hungry. Invading Union armies destroyed crops. They also cut fail lines, making it difficult to move food and supplies to Southern cities and army camps.
As clothing wore out, Southerners made do with patches and homespun cloth. At the beginning of the war, Mary Boykin Chesnut had written in her journal of well-dressed Confederate troops. By 1863, she was writing of soldiers dressed in “rags and tags.
By 1864, Southerners were writing letters like this one to soldiers on the battlefront: “We haven’t got nothing in the house to eat but a little bit o’ meal. I don’t want to you to stop lighten them yankees • • • but try and get off and come home and fix us all up some. Many soldiers found it hard to resist such pleas, even if going home meant deserting their units.
4
I
African American soldiers displayed their courage during their attack on Fort Wagner. The 54th Massachusetts Infantry charged across 200 yards of open beach in their effort to reach the fort.
22.7	Fort Wagner: African Americans and the War
Early in the war, abolitionists had urged Congress to recruit African Americans for the army. But at first, most Northerners regarded the conflict as “a white man’s war.” Congress finally opened the door to black recruits in 1862. About 186,000 African Americans, many of them former slaves, enlisted in the Union army. Another 30,000 African Americans joined the Union navy.
The Massachusetts 54th Regiment
Massachusetts was one of the first states to organize black regiments. The most famous was the 54th Massachusetts Infantry, commanded by Colonel Robert Gould Shaw. Two of the 54th Infantry's 1,000 soldiers were sons of Frederick Douglass. 
The men of the Massachusetts 54th were paid less than white soldiers. When the black soldiers learned this, they protested the unequal treatment by refusing to accept any pay at all. In a letter to Lincoln, Corporal James Henry Gooding asked, "Are we Soldiers, or are we Laborers? ... We have done a Soldier's duty. Why can't we have a Soldier's pay?" At Lincoln's urging, Congress finally granted black soldiers equal pay. 
After three months of training, The Massachusetts 54th was sent to South Carolina to take part in an attack on Fort Wagner outside of Charleston. As they prepared for battle, the ment of the 54th faced the usual worries of untested troops. But they also faced the added fear that if captured, they might be sold into slavery.
434 Chapter 22
African Americans at War The assault on Fort Wagner was an impossible mission. To reach the fort, troops had to cross 200 yards of open, sandy beach. Rifle and cannon fire poured down on them. After losing nearly half of their men, the survivors of the 54th regiment retreated. But their bravery won them widespread respect.
During the war, 166 African American regiments fought in nearly 500 battles. Black soldiers often received little training, poor equipment, and less pay than white soldiers. They also risked death or enslavement if captured. Still, African Americans fought with great courage to save the Union.
22.8	Appomattox: Total War Brings an End
During the first years of the war, Lincoln had searched for a commander who was willing to fight the Confederates. The president finally found the leader he needed in General Grant. He made Grant commander of the Union forces in March 1864. Grant s views on war were quite straightforward: “The art of war is simple enough. Find out where your enemy is. Get at him as soon as you can. Strike at him as hard as you can and as often as you can, and keep moving on.”
Using this strategy, Grant mapped out a plan for ending the war.
He would lead a large force against Lee to capture Richmond. At the same time, General William Tecumseh Sherman would lead a second army into Georgia to take Atlanta.
In 1864, Lincoln gave command of all Union forces to Ulysses S. Grant. Grant believed in using his larger army to wear down the enemy regardless of the casualties that his own forces suffered.
Grant Invades Virginia In May 1864, General Grant invaded Virginia with a force of more than 100,000 men. They met Lee’s army of 60,000 in a dense forest known as the Wilderness. In two days of fierce fighting, Grant lost 18,000 men. Still, Grant would not retreat. “I propose to fight it out along this line,” he said, “if it takes all summer.
He followed Lee’s army to Cold Harbor, Virginia, where he lost 7,000 men in 15 minutes of fighting.
By the time the two forces reached Petersburg, a railroad center 20 miles south of Richmond, Grant’s losses almost equaled Lee’s entire army. But he was able to reinforce his army with fresh troops. Lee, who had also suffered heavy losses, could not.
Total War Grant believed in total war war on the enemy’s will to fight and its ability to support an army. With his army tied down in northern Virginia, Grant ordered General Philip Sheridan to wage total war in Virginia’s grain-rich Shenandoah Valley. “Let that valley be so left that crows flying over it will have to carry their rations along with them,” ordered Grant.
General Sherman, a believer in total war, cut a path of destruction through Georgia. This photograph shows the burned ruins of Atlanta.	In May 1864, General Sherman left Tennessee for Georgia with orders to inflict all the damage you can against their war resources.” In September, Sherman reached Atlanta, the South’s most important rail and manufacturing center. His army set the city ablaze. The Reelection of Lincoln Any hope of victory for the South lay in the defeat of President Lincoln in the election of 1864. Northern Democrats nominated General George McClellan to run against Lincoln. Knowing that the North was weary of war, McClellan urged an immediate end to the conflict. 
Lincoln doubted he would win reelection. Grant seemed stuck in northern Virginia, and there was no end in sight to the appalling bloodletting. Luckily for the president, Sheridan's destruction of the Shenandoah Valley and Sherman's capture of Atlanta came just in time to rescue his campaign. These victories changed Northern views of Lincoln and his prospects for ending the war. In November, Lincoln was reelected. 
Sherman's March Through Georgeia
After burning Atlanta, Sherman marched his army across the state toward Savannah, promising to "make Georgia howl." His purpose was to destroy the last untouched supply base for the Confederacy 
As they marched through Georgia, Sherman's troops destroyed everything they found of value. They trampled or burned fields and stripped houses of their valuables. They burned supplies of hay and food. Dead horses, hogs, and cattle that his troops could not eat or carry away lined the roads. The troops destroyed everything useful in a 60-mile-wide path. 
436 Chapter 22
In December 1864, Sherman captured Savannah, Georgia. From there, he turned north and destroyed all opposition in the Carolinas. Marching 425 miles in 50 days, he reached Raleigh, North Carolina, by March 1865. There he waited for Grant’s final attack on Richmond.
The War Ends For nine months, Grant’s forces battered Lee’s army at Petersburg, the gateway to Richmond. On April 1, 1865, the Union forces finally broke through Confederate lines to capture the city. Two days later, Union troops marched into Richmond.
Grant’s soldiers moved quickly to surround Lee’s army. Lee told his officers, “There is nothing left for me to do but go and see General Grant, and I would rather die a thousand deaths.”
On April 9, 1865, General Lee, in full dress uniform, arrived at Wilmer McLean’s house in the village of Appomattox Court House. He was there to surrender his army to General Grant. The Union general met him in a mud-splattered and crumpled uniform.
Most battles during the Civil War took place in or near border states or in Confederate states.
The Civil War, 1861-1865
Appomattox Court House
a village in Virginia that was the site of the Confederate surrender to Union forces under the command of General Ulysses S. Grant
I 1 Union states 1	| Border states
r 1 Territories
*	Union victory
*	Confederate victory Indecisive or a draw
CANADA


S'
The Civil War
General Lee, seated at left, surrendered to General Grant at Appomattox Court House, Virginia. Grant was generous to Lee's soldiers, sending food to the troops and allowing them to keep their horses and mules.
Grant’s terms of surrender were generous. Confederate soldiers could go home if they promised to fight no longer. They could take with them their own horses and mules, which they would need for spring plowing. Officers could keep their swords and weapons. Grant also ordered that food be sent to Lee’s men. Lee accepted the terms.
As Lee returned to his headquarters, Union troops began to shoot their guns and cheer wildly. Grant told them to stop celebrating, dhe war is over, he said, the rebels are our countrymen again.”
"Touched by Fire" No one who fought in the Civil War would ever forget the intensity of the experience. “In our youth,” wrote Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., our hearts were touched by fire.”
The nation, too, had been touched by fire. Many compared the Civil War to a great furnace that burned away one country and forged a new one in its place. In this new country, neither slavery nor the right to secession had any place. Just as Lincoln had said, the Union was a single whole, not a collection of sovereign states. Before the wan Americans tended to say “the United States are.” After the war, they said “the United States is.”
xxxvov mumenious changes came at a horrifying cost. Billion dollars had been spent on the conflict. Almost every family ha a member or a friend. More than 620,000 Union and Confedei soldiers were dead. Thousands more came home missing an ai or a leg. It would take generations for the South to recover from
438 Chapter 22
environmental destruction wrought by the war. Croplands lay in ruins Two-fifths of the South’s livestock had been destroyed.
Many historians have called the Civil War the first truly modern war. It was the first war to reflect the technology of the Industrial Revolution: railroads, the telegraph, armored ships, more accurate and destructive weaponry. It also introduced total war-war between whole societies, not just uniformed armies.
As devastating as it was, the Civil War left many issues unsettled. Ihe old society of the South had been destroyed, but the memory of it lingered. Thousands of white Southerners clung to a romantic picture of the prewar South. Decaying plantation houses became shrines. In the years to come, many in the South would try to re-create their vanished way of life. Secession and slavery were gone, but conflicts over states rights and the status of African Americans would continue long into the future.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, you read about the Civil War between the Union and the Confederacy.
Ihe North Versus the South Both sides had strengths and weaknesses going into the war. The North had a larger population and more factories and railroads than the South, but it lacked strong military leadership. The South had serious economic and transportation problems, but it had better military leadership and the advantage of fighting a defensive war.
Bull Run: An Awakening The Battle of Bull Run in 1861 was a victory for the Confederacy and showed the Union that ending the war would not be easy. As the North and South built their armies, women supported their families and the military forces.
Antietam: A Bloody Affair Using a strategy called the Anaconda Plan, Union forces blockaded Southern ports and gained control of the Mississippi River. High death tolls at the Battle of Antietam reflected new methods of warfare that included improved weapons.
Gettysburg: A Turning Point The Battle of Gettysburg ended the South’s last attempt to invade the North. From that point on, Confederate forces fought a defensive war in South-ern territory.
Vicksburg: A Besieged City In 1863, Confederate forces continued to hold Vicksburg, a key location on the Mississippi River. Capturing Vicksburg would divide the Confederacy in two and allow the Union to control the Mississippi River. After weeks of bombardment, Vicksburg surrendered.
Fort Wagner: African Americans and the War African Americans were able to join Union military forces in 1862. They fought in nearly 500 battles. The most famous black regiment was the 54th Massachusetts Infantry, which fought in the Battle of Fort Wagner.
Appomattox: Total War Brings an End In April 1865, Union forces captured the Confed erate capital of Richmond and surrounded General Lee s Confederate army. Lee surrendered at Appomattox Court House.
The Civil War
Reading Further
Benjamin Hardin Helm
married
EmilieTodd Helm
■ sisters -
Mary Todd Lincoln
Abraham
Lincoln
married------1
Benjamin Hardin Helm's Dilemma
Benjamin Hardin Helm was born in the Southern state of Kentucky and married a Southern woman. But that led to family connections, and even job opportunities, with the most powerful family in the North. Which side would he choose?
Divided House, Divided Families
Before the Civil War, Abraham Lincoln had warned, "A house divided against itself cannot stand." But the nation did divide. People took sides. North or South. For most of them, the choice was clear. But for some, especially in the border states, the decision was difficult and painful. Not only was the country divided, but many families were, too.
Even as the Civil War began, Benjamin Hardin Helm had the prospect of a bright future in front of him. President Lincoln had offered him a good job with the Union army. The position paid well and would not require Helm to fight. It was a job many people wanted. “The position you offer me is beyond what I had expected in my most hopeful dreams,” Helm told the president. Still, he could not decide.
Helm was from Kentucky, a border state divided in its loyalties between North and South. He came from a prominent family and had served in the state legislature. He had also been an officer in the U.S. Army. Helm favored the South, and many of his family members and friends did, too. But he also had friends and family who supported the North. Even his father, a former governor, backed the Union.
There was a further complication. Helm was married to Emilie Todd, a sister of Mary Todd Lincoln, President Lincoln’s wife. That made Helm the president s brother-in-law. He and Emilie were close to the Lincolns.
Helm struggled with his decision. Lincoln’s offer was generous. By accepting it, however, Helm would be turning against much of his family, including members who had joined the Confederate army. By refusing it, he would cut himself off from other members of the family such as the Lincolns. I had a bitter struggle with myself,” he told a friend.
In the end, Helm turned down the president’s offer. It was “the most painful moment of my life,” he said, but he felt he could not take up arms against the South. Instead, he joined the Confederate cause and fought against the Union.
Helm s dilemma, though difficult, was not unusual. Many people found themselves torn between competing loyalties during the Civil War. This was especially true in border states like Kentucky, Mary-and, Missouri, and Delaware. Although these states remained in the Union, many of their citizens felt sympathy for the South. Families in border states were often deeply divided over the war.
Lee's Decision
Virginia was also a border state, but one that joined the Confederacy, obert E. Lee was one of its military heroes. Like Hardin Helm, Lee
a Ol^i decision. He, too, was offered a key position in the Union army. And like Helm, he turned it down, with great misgivings.
440

Before the war, Lee was one of the most promising officers in the U.S. Army. A graduate of West Point, he had served with distinction during the Mexican War. As the Civil War began, Lincoln sent word to Lee offering him command of the Union army.
Lee was honored by the president’s offer. He supported the Union and thought secession was a mistake. But he was a loyal Virginian above all and would not turn against his home state. “With all my devotion to the Union,” he wrote, “I have not been able to . .. raise my hand against my relatives, my children, my home.”
Lee resigned his position and became a Confederate general. The man who might have led the Union army eventually became the top commander of the Confederate forces.
Lincoln's Family Troubles
Robert E. Lee’s decision probably came as little surprise to Lincoln.
He knew that Southern officers had divided loyalties in the same way that states and families did. Lincoln’s own family was a case in point.
The president actually had little immediate family of his own. But his wife’s family, the Todds, was quite large. Mary Todd Lincoln had 14 brothers and sisters, all from Kentucky. Of these, 6 supported the Union and 8 backed the Confederacy. Several of her brothers fought in the Confederate army.
The Todds were important to Lincoln, and he did everything in his power to help them, even when they turned against him. Just as he hied to hold the nation together, he tried to keep the family together. But this was too much for even the president to accomplish.
Robert E. Lee was a brilliant soldier who left the U.S. Army to fight for his home state. He became the Confederacy's top general and personal military adviserto the Confederate president, Jefferson Davis.
The Civil War 4l
Henry Lane Stone joined the Ninth Kentucky Cavalry, led by General John H. Morgan. He took part in various battles, including a famous raid into Union territory.
As Kentucky Goes, So Goes the Nation
President Lincoln saw Kentucky as a symbol of the nation’s divisions. In fact, the Union and Confederate leaders—Lincoln and Jefferson Davis—were both from Kentucky They were born just 100 miles apart. The state’s white soldiers were split almost evenly between North and South. Two-fifths fought for the Confederacy and three-fifths for the Union. No other state was so evenly divided.
Lincoln believed it was essential to keep Kentucky in the Union.
“I think to lose Kentucky is nearly the same as to lose the whole game,” he said. “Kentucky gone, we cannot hold Missouri, nor, as I think, Maryland.” Officially, Kentucky remained neutral in the war, and Lincoln did what he could to keep it from seceding. “I hope to have God on my side,” he supposedly said, “but I must have Kentucky.”
Fathers and Sons Divided
Among Kentucky families, some of the bitterest divisions arose between fathers and sons. The Crittenden family was one example.
John J. Crittenden was a respected member of Congress who had worked hard to prevent the Civil War. Early in the war, he wrote to his oldest son, George, urging him to remain loyal to the Union. Kentucky loves the Union,” he wrote, “and will cling to it as long as possible. And so, I hope, will you.” His words were in vain. George joined the Confederate army and, in turn, Crittenden cut off all contact with his son.
Another case involved the Breckenridge family. Robert J. Breckenridge was a strong Union supporter. But his son Robert Jr. decided to join the Confederacy. He wrote his father, “Be ... as lenient as possible in your thoughts of me. Breckenridge was stunned. He wrote his other son, Willie, saying, “[Your brother] has hopelessly ruined himself.” Then Willie joined the Confederacy, too. Breckenridge was doubly stricken.
One young Kentuckian, Henry Lane Stone, ran away from home to join the rebel forces. He did so in secret because he knew his father and brothers would object. One of his brothers had already joined the Union army. A month later, Stone wrote home to his father. “I can imagine how your feelings are, one son in the Northern and another in the Southern army,” he wrote. “But so it is ... Your rebelling son, Henry.
442 Chapter 22
Brother Against Brother
Henry Stone and his brother fought on opposing sides in the war. This was not uncommon.
In fact, the Civil War was sometimes called the “brothers’ war.” One notable case of brother against brother involved the Campbell brothers from Scotland.
James and Alexander Campbell came to America in the 1850s. James settled in Charleston, South Carolina. Alexander chose New York.
When the war began, both signed up to fight, though on opposite sides.
In June 1862, Alexander’s regiment was part of an invasion force sent to retake Charleston from the Confederates. At the Battle of Seces-sionville, Union troops attacked Ft. Lamar, one of the forts guarding the city. Although neither
brother knew it at the time, they were both involved in the battle. Alexander held the U.S. flag at the base of the fort’s walls, while James stood above, firing down on the attackers. James later wrote his brother,
I was astonished to hear from the prisoners that you [were] color
Bearer of the Regiment that assaulted the Battery ... I hope you and I will never again meet... on the Battlefield but if such should be the case ... I will strive to discharge my duty to my country and my cause.
The two brothers fought in other battles of the war, but never again in the same place. After the war, they corresponded with each other and remained on good terms.
Another soldier, Matthew H. Peters, later recounted his own experience of the brothers’ war in a poem:
Both of us fought for what we thought right,
But of duty each took a different view;
Both of us entered the perilous fight
And did our duty as patriots do—
But he wore the gray and I wore the blue.
—Matthew H. Peters, “My Brother and I,” 1893
Unlike these soldiers, Hardin Helm did not survive the war. He was killed at the Battle of Chickamauga in 1863. When Lincoln got the news, he was devastated. “I never saw Mr. Lincoln more moved than when he heard of the death of his young brother-in-law,” said a friend. Helm had died fighting for the Confederacy, but he was still family.
For Lincoln, Helm’s death was yet another tragedy of the divide nation. Families and communities had been torn apart by the war. would take years for the wounds to heal.
At the end of the Civil War, grateful families welcomed the soldiers home. In divided families, the homecomings were not always easy.
! I
The Civil War
