Chapter 20
African Americans in the Mid-1800s
How did African Americans face slavery and discrimination in the mid-1800s?
20.1	Introduction
By 1850, the population of the United States had grown to just over 23 million. This figure included 3.6 million African Americans. The great majority of African Americans lived in slavery. Harriet Powers, the woman who created the quilt on the opposite page, was one of them.
Powers was born into slavery in Georgia in 1837. Like many slaves, she grew up hearing Bible stories. In her quilts, she used animals and figures from Africa and the United States to illustrate those stories, along with scenes from her life. Hidden in her images were messages of hope and freedom for slaves.
Not all African Americans were slaves. By mid-century, there were about half a million free blacks as well. Many were former slaves who had escaped to freedom.
Whether African Americans lived in slavery or freedom, discrimination (unequal treatment) shaped their lives. Throughout the country, whites looked down on blacks. Whites ignored the contributions blacks made to American life. They thought of the United States as “their country.” Such racist thinking later prompted African American scholar and reformer W. E. B. Du Bois to ask,
Harriet Powers's quilts are considered the best examples of 1800s Southern quilting. Two of her quilts survive. They are preserved in museums in Washington, D.C., and Boston, Massachusetts. Above is a detail from the quilt at left.
© 2003 Museum of Fine Arts, Boston
Your country? How came it to be yours? Before the Pilgrims landed we were here. Here we brought you our three gifts and mingled them with yours; a gift of story and song, soft, stirring melody in an ... unmelodious land; the gift of sweat and brawn [physical strength] to beat back the wilderness ... and lay the foundations of this vast economic empire . . . the third, a gift of the Spirit.
ip
|P
p!
In this chapter, you will explore how African Americans faced and endured discrimination and slavery in the mid-1800s. You will also learn more about the gifts that African Americans brought to America.
African Americans in the Mid-1800s 3j
Free African Americans usually held low-paying jobs. The barber pictured here is one example.
The Granger Collection, NewYork
racism the belief that one race is superior to another
20.2	North and South, Slave and Free
The experiences of African Americans in the mid-1800s depended on where they lived and whether they lived in slavery or freedom. Former slave Frederick Douglass toured the North talking to white audiences about slavery. To him, the biggest difference between slaves and free blacks was their legal status. Free blacks had some rights by law. Slaves did not. Whether free or slave, however, the lives of African Americans were shaped by racism, the belief that one race is superior to another.
Slaves' Legal Status The law defined slaves as property. Legally, slaveholders could do almost anything with their slaves. They could buy and sell slaves. They could leave slaves to their children or heirs. They could give slaves away to settle a bet. But in many states, they could not set slaves free.
As property, slaves had none of the rights that free people took for granted. “In law, the slave has no wife, no children, no country, no home,” Douglass said. “He can own nothing, possess nothing, acquire nothing.”
Rural and Urban Slaves Most slaves worked on farms and plantations across the South. By 1860, there were also about 70,000 slaves living in towns and cities. Most were hired out, or sent to work in factories, mills, or workshops. The wages they earned belonged to their owners. Often, urban slaves were allowed to “live out” on their own, rather than under the watchful eyes of their owners. Because of such freedom, observed Douglass, “A city slave is almost a freeman, compared with a slave on the plantation.”
Free Blacks in the South About half of all free African Americans lived in the South. Most worked as laborers, craftspeople, or household servants in towns and cities.
376 Chapter 20
Many white Southerners viewed free blacks as a dangerous group that had to be controlled so that, in the words of South Carolina slaveholders, they would not create “discontent among our slaves.” Free blacks were forbidden to own guns. They could not travel freely from town to town or state to state. Blacks were not allowed to work at certain jobs. Such restrictions led Douglass to conclude, “No colored man is really free in a slaveholding state.”
Free Blacks in the North African Americans in the North lived freer lives. But blacks experienced discrimination, or unequal treatment, everywhere they turned. In many states, African Americans were denied the right to vote. They had trouble finding good jobs. In the 1850s, some 87 percent of free blacks in New York held low-paying jobs. “Why should I strive hard?” asked one young African American. “What are my prospects? . . . No one will employ me; white boys won’t work with me.”
In addition to unequal treatment, policies of segregation separated blacks from whites in nearly all public places. Black children were often denied entry into public schools. Those states that did educate black children set up separate schools for that purpose. A New Yorker observed around 1860,
discrimination unequal treatment based on a person’s race, gender, religion, place of birth, or other arbitrary characteristic
segregation the social separation of groups of people, especially by race
Even the noblest black is denied that which is free to the vilest [worst] white. The omnibus, the [railroad] car, the ballot-box, the jury box, the halls of legislation, the army, the public lands, the school, the church, the lecture room, the social circle, the [restaurant] table, are all either absolutely or virtually denied to him.
Douglass discovered how deeply rooted this racism was when he ried to join a church in New Bedford, Massachusetts, and was turned way. “I tried all the other churches in New Bedford with the same 'esult,” he wrote.
African Americans responded to discrimination by organizing to teip themselves. In 1816, Richard Allen, a former slave, became he first bishop of the African Methodist Episcopal Church, fhe AME, which still exists today, quickly became a enter of African American life. Allen also created
)rganizations to improve the lives of blacks, such ls the African Society for the Education of Youth.
Other Northern blacks started their own schools, lurches, and self-help organizations. In 1853, free tlacks formed the National Council of Colored Peo }le to protest the unequal treatment they received.
>Uch treatment, the council declared, would humble he proudest, crush the energies of the strongest,
[nd retard the progress of the swiftest.” That blacks vere neither humbled nor crushed by prejudice an hscrimination was evidence of their courage an sp
Lemuel Haynes, shown here preaching from a pulpit, fought at Lexington during the Revolutionary War. He was the first black minister of a white congregation.
GrangerCo//ect.on_^
African Americans in the Mid-1800s	377
20.3	The Economics of Slavery
Only wealthier planters could afford to buy slaves. The great majority of white Southerners did not own slaves. Why, then, did the South remain so loyal to slavery? Part of the answer to that question lies in the growth of the Southern economy after the invention of the cotton gin in 1793.
The cotton gin made cotton a hugely profitable cash crop in the South. In 1790, the South produced just 3,000 bales of cotton. By the 1850s, production had soared to more than 4 million bales a year. Cotton brought new wealth to the South. Robert Fogel, a historian who has studied the economics of slavery, wrote,
If we treat the North and South as separate nations... the South would stand as the fourth most prosperous nation of the world in 1860... more prosperous than France, Germany, Denmark, or any of the countries in Europe except England.
Whether they owned slaves or not, white Southerners understood that their economy depended on cotton. They also knew that cotton planters depended on slave labor to grow their profitable crop. For planters with few or no slaves, however, the prospect of owning slaves became less likely as the demand for, and the price of, slaves rose.
The South's economy depended upon slave labor to grow and harvest cotton, the South's mostvaluable export.

:er 20
The Slave System, 1801-1860
The map shows the increase in cotton production from the early to the mid-1800s. The graph shows that by I860, the nation's slave population was concentrated in the South. Northern states had outlawed slavery by this time.
Unorganized
Territory
Free States
90°W
Total State Populations, 1860
CZ3	03	W
CO C «/}	■«=	03
Source: U.S. Census Bureau
High prices were both good and bad for the men and women trapped in slavery. As prices went up, slaves became more valuable to their owners. This may have encouraged slaveholders to take better care of their workers. At the same time, the rising value of their slaves made slaveholders less willing to listen to talk of ending slavery. In their eyes, freeing their slaves could only mean one thing: utter financial ruin.
		
		
0	200	400 kilometers
Albers Equal-Area Projection

TX gF
m Extent of cotton growing, 1801-1839 [~ I Extent of cotton growing, 1840-1860 —► Slave trading routes
Gulf of Mexico
3 -
i= 03	—
I'
Slaves who worked as field hands labored from dawn until well into the night. They might be beaten if they failed to pick their usual amount.
i
I
I
20.4	Working Conditions of Slaves
Slaves worked on farms of various sizes. On small farms, owners and slaves worked side by side in the fields. On large plantations, planters hired overseers to supervise their slaves. Overseers were paid to “care for nothing but to make a large crop.” To do this, they tried to get the most work possible out of the slaves who worked in the fields.
About three-quarters of rural slaves were field hands who toiled from dawn to dark tending crops. An English visitor described a field hand’s day:
He is called up in the morning at day break, and is seldom allowed time enough to swallow three mouthfuls of hominy [boiled corn], or hoecake [cornbread], but is driven out immediately to the field to hard labor. .. About noon . .. he eats his dinner, and he is seldom allowed an hour for that purpose . . . Then they return to severe labor, which continues until dusk.
Even then, a slave’s workday was not finished. After dark, there was still water to carry, wood to split, pigs to feed, corn to shuck, cotton to clean, and other chores to be done. One slave recalled,
I never know what it was to rest. I just work all the time from morning till late at night. I had to do everything there was to do on the outside. Work in the field, chop wood, hoe corn, till sometime I feels like my back surely break.
Not all slaves worked in the fields. Some were skilled seamstresses, carpenters, or blacksmiths. Others worked in the master’s house as cooks or servants. When asked about her work, a house slave replied,
What kind of work I did?... I cooked, [then] I was house maid, an I raised I don't know how many [children] ... I was always good when it come to [the] sick, so [that] was mostly my job.
No matter how hard they worked, slaves could never look forward to an easier life. Most began work at the age of six and continued until they died. As one man put it, “Slave young, slave long.”
Chapter 20
20.5	Living Conditions of Slaves
Most masters viewed their slaves as they did their land—things to be “worn out, not improved.” They provided only what was needed to keep their slaves healthy enough to work. Slaves lived crowded together in rough cabins. One recalled,
We lodged in log huts, and on bare ground. Wooden floors were an unknown luxury. In a single room were huddled, like cattle, ten or a dozen persons, men, women, and children . .. We had neither bedsteads, nor furniture of any description. Our beds were collections of straw and old rags, thrown down in the corners.
Slaves seldom went hungry. “Not to give a slave enough to eat,” reported Frederick Douglass, “is regarded as ... meanness [stinginess] even among slaveholders.” Slaves received rations of cornmeal, bacon, and molasses. Many kept gardens or hunted and fished to vary their diets. The owner described below fed his slaves well:
Marse [master] Alec had plenty for his slaves to eat. There was meat, bread, collard greens, snap beans, Waters, peas, all sorts of dried fruit, and just lots of milk and butter.
Slaves wore clothing made of coarse homespun linen or rough “Negro cloth.” Northern textile mills made this cloth especially for slave clothes. Douglass reported that a field hand received a yearly allowance of “two coarse linen shirts,
one pair of linen trousers •.. one jacket, one pair of trousers for winter, made of coarse Negro cloth, one pair of stockings, and one pair of shoes.” Children too young to work received “two coarse linen shirts per year. When these failed them, they went naked” until the next year.
While slaves were poorly housed and clothed compared to most white Southerners, they were more likely to receive medical care. Slaveholders often hired doctors to treat sick or injured slaves. Given doctors’ limited medical knowledge, this care probably did little to improve slaves’ health.
Most slave cabins consisted of a single room where the entire family lived. They had a fireplace for cooking and heat. The windows usually had no glass.
African Americans in the Mid-1800s
Some slave owners beat or whipped slaves as a way of controlling them. However, most slave owners avoided savage beatings because injured slaves could not work and lash marks reduced their resale value.
20.6	Controlling Slaves
Slavery was a system of forced labor. To make this system work, slaveholders had to keep slaves firmly under control. Some slaveholders used harsh punishments—beating, whipping, branding, and other forms of torture—to maintain that control. But punishments often backfired on slaveholders. A slave who had been badly whipped might not be able to work for some time. Harsh punishments were also likely to make slaves feel more resentful and rebellious.
Slaveholders preferred to control their workforce by making slaves feel totally dependent on their masters. Owners encouraged such dependence by treating their slaves like grown-up children. They also kept their workers as ignorant as possible about the world beyond the plantation. Frederick Douglass’s master said that a slave “should know nothing but to obey his master—to do as it is told to do.”
Slaves who failed to learn this lesson were sometimes sent to slave-breakers. Such men were experts at turning independent, spirited African Americans into humble, obedient slaves. When he was 16, Douglass was sent to a slave breaker named Edward Covey.
Covey’s method consisted of equal parts violence, fear, and overwork. Soon after Douglass arrived on Covey’s farm, he received his first whipping. After that, he was beaten so often that “aching bones and a sore back were my constant companions.”
Covey’s ability to instill fear in his slaves was as effective as his whippings. Slaves never knew when he might be watching them. “He would creep and crawl in ditches and gullies,” Douglass recalled, to spy on his workers.
Finally, Covey worked his slaves beyond endurance. Wrote Douglass,
We worked in all weathers. It was never too hot or too cold; it could never rain, blow, hail, or snow too hard for us to work in the field.. . The longest days were too short for him, and the shortest nights too long for him. I was somewhat unmanageable when I first got there, but a few months of this discipline tamed me. ..I was broken in body, soul, and spirit. .. The dark night of slavery closed in upon me.
20.7	Resistance to Slavery
Despite the efforts of slaveholders to crush their spirits, slaves found countless ways to resist slavery. As former slave Harriet Jacobs wrote after escaping to freedom, “My master had power and law on his side.
I had a determined will. There is might [power] in each.”
Day-to-Day Resistance For most slaves, resistance took the form of quiet, or passive, acts of rebellion. Field hands pulled down fences, broke tools, and worked so sloppily that they damaged crops. House slaves sneaked food out of the master’s kitchen.
382 Chapter 20
Slaves pretended to be dumb, clumsy, sick, or insane to get out of work. One slave avoided working for years by claiming to be nearly blind, only to regain his sight once freed.
In some instances, resistance turned deadly when house servants put poison into slave owners’ food. So many slaves set fire to their owners’ homes and barns that the American Fire Insurance Company refused to insure property in the South.
Open Defiance Quiet resistance sometimes flared into open defiance. When pushed too hard, slaves refused to work, rejected orders, or struck back violently. Owners often described slaves who reacted in this way as “insolent” (disrespectful) or “unmanageable.”
Frederick Douglass reached his breaking point one day when the slave breaker Covey began to beat him for no particular reason. Rather than take the blows, as he had so many times before, Douglass fought back. He wrestled Covey to the ground, holding him “so firmly by the throat that his blood followed my nails.” For Douglass, this moment was “the turning point in my career as a slave.”
My long-crushed spirit rose, cowardice departed, bold defiance took its place; and I now resolved that, however long I might remain a slave inform, the day had passed when I could be a slave in fact. I did not hesitate to let it be known of me, that the white man who expected to succeed in whipping, must also succeed in killing me.
Covey knew this and never laid a hand on Douglass again.
Reward
Running Away Some slaves tried to escape by running away to freedom in the North. The risks were enormous. Slaveholders hired professional slave catchers and their
packs of bloodhounds to hunt down runaway slaves. If caught, a runaway risked being mauled by dogs, brutally whipped, or even killed. Still, Douglass and countless other slaves took the risk.

This 1872 engraving shows escaping slaves resisting slave catchers. Atthe upper right is a notice of a reward being offered for escaped slaves.
African Americans in the Mid-1800s
Harriet Tubman
Underground Railroad a
secret network of free blacks and whites who helped thousands of slaves escape to free states and to Canada
Nat Turner's Rebellion a slave rebellion led by Nat Turner that took place in Virginia in 1831
Slaves found many ways to escape bondage. Some walked to freedom in the North, hiding by day and traveling at night when they could follow the North Star. Others traveled north by boat or train, using forged identity cards and clever disguises to get past watchful slave patrols. A few runaways mailed themselves to freedom in boxes or coffins.
Thousands of runaways escaped to free states and to Canada with the help of the Underground Railroad, a secret network of free blacks and sympathetic whites. The members of the Underground Railroad provided transportation and “safe houses” where runaways could hide. A number of guides, or “conductors,” risked their lives to help escaping slaves travel the “freedom train.” One of the most successful was Harriet Tubman. Having escaped slavery herself, Tubman courageously returned to the South approximately 20 times between 1850 and 1860, guiding more than 300 men, women, and children to freedom.
Rebellion At times, resistance erupted into violent rebellion. Slave revolts occurred in cities, on plantations, and even on ships at sea. Fear of slave uprisings haunted slaveholders. Planters, wrote one visitor to the South, “never lie down to sleep without... loaded pistols at their sides.”
In 1822, authorities in Charleston, South Carolina, learned that Denmark Vesey, a free black, was preparing to lead a sizable revolt of slaves. Vesey, along with more than 30 slaves, was arrested and hanged.
Nine years later, in 1831, a slave named Nat Turner led a bloody uprising in Virginia. In what became known as Nat Turner's Rebellion, Turner and his followers set out to kill every white person they could find. Armed with axes and guns, they killed at least 57 people over a period of two days.
Vesey s and Turner s rebellions panicked white Southerners. In response, Southern states passed strict slave codes that tightened owners control of their slaves and provided for harsher punishment of slaves by authorities. As one frightened Virginian remarked, “A Nat Turner might be in any family.”
The bloodiest slave uprising in the South was organized in 1831 by Nat Turner, a black preacher. This wood engraving, entitled Nat Turner and His Confederates in Conference, shows Turner leaning on a pole and speaking to his companions.
384 Chapter 20
This photograph shows five generations of a slave family on a South Carolina plantation. Slaves often found it difficult to keep their families together. Southern laws did not recognize slave marriages or families, and owners could split up families as they wished.
20.8	Slave Families and Communities
Slavery made community and family life difficult. Legally, slave fami-
lies did not exist. No Southern state recognized slave marriages. Legal
control of slave children rested not with their parents, but with their
masters. Owners could break up slave families at any time by selling
a father, a mother, or a child to someone else. Of all the things they
endured, slaves most feared being sold away from their loved ones.
Most slaves grew up in families headed by a father and mother. Unable to marry legally, slaves created their own weddings, which often involved the tradition of jumping over a broomstick. One slave recalled,
The preacher would say to the man, “Do you take this woman to be your wife?” He says, “Yes” “Well, jump the broom ” After he jumped, the preacher would say the same to the woman. When she jumped, the preacher said, “I pronounce you man and wife”
Caring for children was never easy. Booker T. Washingtons mother snatched a few moments for our care in the early morning before her work began, and at night after the day’s work was done. Still, parents found time to teach the lessons children would need to survive.
Silence around whites was one such lesson. Elijah Marrs recalled that ‘Mothers were necessarily compelled to be severe on their children to keep them from talking too much.” Obedience was another lesson. William Webb’s mother taught him “not to rebel against the Nen that were treating me like some dumb brute, making me work and refusing to let me learn.”
Parents also taught their children other essential lessons about caring, kindness, pride, and hope. They taught them to respect them-selves and other members of the slave community, especially older slaves. “There is not to be found, among any people,” wrote Douglass, a more rigid enforcement of the law of respect to elders.
These were the lessons that helped slaves, under the most difficult conditions, to create loving families and close communities. In doing so, they met the most basic of human needs the need for a place to feel loved, respected, and safe.
African Americans in the Mid-1800s	38!
20.9	Leisure Time Activities
These simple words capture the constant weariness that slaves endured:
Come day,
Go day,
God send Sunday.
Slaves toiled all week in fields that seemed to stretch “from one end of the earth to the other.” But, on Saturday night and Sunday, their time was their own.
Saturday nights were a time for social events, like corn-husking or pea-shelling parties. These social events combined work and fun. One slave recalled,
I’ve seen many a corn huskin at ole Majors farm when the corn would he piled as high as the house. Two sets of men would start huskin from opposite sides of the heap. It would keep one man busy just getting the husks out of the way, and the corn would be thrown over the husker’s head and filling the air like birds. The women usually had a quilting at those times, so they were pert and happy.
In this painting, black house servants are shown celebrating a wedding party in the kitchen. Dancing, singing, and telling tales allowed slaves to temporarily forgettheir harsh conditions.
A quilting bee was one of the rare times when slave women could gather to work and talk. In those few precious hours, they were free to express themselves with needle and cloth. The quilts they created were not only beautiful, but also very much needed as bedding for their families.
After the sewing, men joined the party for a “quilting feast” and dancing. Slaves made music out of almost anything. “Stretch cowhides over cheese-boxes and you had tambourines,” one former slave recalled. “Saw bones from off a cow, knock them together, and call it a drum. Or use broom-straws, on fiddle-strings, and you had your entire orchestra.
Sunday was a day for religion and recreation. Slaves spent their Sundays going to church, eating, hunting, fishing, dancing, singing, telling tales, naming babies, playing games, and visiting with friends. In New Orleans, hundreds of slaves gathered on Sunday afternoons in public spaces to dance, sing, and talk. All of these activities helped African Americans forget the sorrows of slavery.
386 Chapter 20
Biblical stories were frequently illustrated on quilts made by slaves. This is one of the two surviving quilts created by Harriet Powers.
20.10	Slave Churches
Many slaveholders encouraged their slaves to attend church on Sunday.
Some read the Bible to their workers and prayed with them. Owners and white ministers preached the same message: “If you disobey your earthly master, you offend your heavenly Master.”
Not surprisingly, this was not a popular lesson among slaves.
“Dat ole white preacher [just] was telling us slaves to be good to our marsters,” recalled Cornelius Garner. “We ain’t kerr’d a bit ’bout dat stuff he was telling us ’cause we wanted to sing, pray, and serve God in our own way.”
Instead, slaves created their own “invisible church” that brought
together African roots and American needs. This invisible church met in slave quarters or secret forest clearings known as hush arbors.
One slave reported that,
When [slaves] go round singing, “Steal Away to Jesus that mean there going to be a religious meeting that night. The masters ... didn't like them religious meetings, so us naturally slips off at night, down in the bottoms or somewheres. Sometimes us sing and pray all night.
Rather than teach about obedience, black preachers told the story of Moses leading his people out of slavery in Egypt. Black worshipers sang spirituals that expressed their desire for freedom and faith in a better world to come. One black preacher wrote,
The singing was accompanied by a certain ecstasy of motion, clapping of hands, tossing of heads, which would continue wit out cessation [stopping] about half an hour. . . The ol ou partook of their ecstasy; it rang with their jubilant shouts, an shook in all its joints.
Whites sometimes criticized the enthusiasm of black wo	P
«.saying they lacked true religious feeling. Many slaves, however,
believed it was their masters who lacked such feeling.	z.
explained one man, “religion needs a little motion specia y
^ Religion hdped^laveTbear their sufferrng and still hn , ,v inlife, h their prayers and sptrituals, they gave voice to then deepest long *ngs, their greatest sorrows, and their highest hopes
African Americans in the Mid-1800s	387
This watercolor, entitled The Old Plantation, shows one aspect of the rich culture slaves developed in spite of their bondage. Dances, songs, quilts, and folk stories all reflected African traditions as well as the new life slaves faced in America.
oppression the feeling of being weighed down or held back by severe and unfair force
20.11	African American Culture
Africans arrived in the United States speaking many languages and following many cultural traditions. To survive, they had to learn a new language English—and adopt a new way of life. Yet they did not forget their African roots. Across the South, slaves combined their old traditions and new realities to create a distinctive African American culture.
This combining of cultures is evident in Harriet Powers’s story quilt. In square after square, Powers used animals from Africa and America to illustrate Bible stories that she learned as a slave on a Georgia plantation. The doves in her quilt are symbols of a slave’s yearning for freedom. As one spiritual expressed, “Had I the wings of a dove, I’d fly away and be at rest.”
You can also hear this combining of cultures in the songs and spirituals sung by slaves. These songs throb with the rhythms and harmonies Africa, but speak about the realities of slavery. 
Slaves sang about faith, love, work, and the kindness and cruelty of masters. They also expressed their oppression, as in this song recorded by Frederick Douglass:
We raise the wheat, dey gib [they give] us the corn;
We bake the bread, dey gib us the cruss;
We sif the meal, dey gib us the skin;
And dat's the way dey takes us in.
Slave dances were based on African traditions as well. Dancing helped slaves to put aside their cares, express their feelings, and refresh their spirits. According to one former slave, good dancers "could play a tune with their feet, dancing largely to an inward music, a music that was felt, but not heard."
388 Chapter 20
African legends and folktales survived in the stories and jokes told by slaves. For example, Br’er Rabbit, the sly hero of many slave tales, was based on the African trickster Shulo the Hare. In these stories, the small but clever brother rabbit always managed to outwit larger, but duller, brother bear or brother fox—just as slaves hoped to outwit their more powerful masters.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, you learned what life was like for African Americans during the 1800s.
North and South, Slave and Free African Americans had a great impact on the development of American life. The South’s economy was built on slave labor. Some blacks lived in freedom in the North and South, but nowhere could they escape racism and discrimination.
The Economics of Slavery Most white Southerners did not own slaves. Whether they owned slaves or not, whites understood that the South’s economy depended on cotton and the slave labor needed to grow it.
Working and Living Conditions of Slaves All slaves worked constantly —in the fields, as house servants, or at skilled trades. Most slaves lived in simple, dirt-floor cabins.
Controlling Slaves and Resistance to Slavery Some slave owners used harsh punishments to control slaves. Most slaves resisted slavery using quiet acts of rebellion, while some fought back openly. At great risk, many tried to run away. Some slaveholders would rather kill runaways than allow them to escape.
Slave Families, Leisure, and Churches Enslaved African Americans created families and communities under the most difficult conditions. Slaves spent Saturday nights at social events and worshiped in their own churches on Sundays. They prayed and sang spirituals to help themselves find joy and hope in their hard lives.
African American Culture Africans brought many languages and cultural traditions to the United States. The combination of old and new cultural traditions was expressed through their quilts,
songs, dances, and folktales.	f
These cards show scenes of slavery in the United States.
FR K E
African Americans in the Mid-1800s
Reading Further
Before the Civil War, Harriet Tubman helped hundreds of people escape slavery in the South. Because of her wits and bravery, she is a symbol of the Underground Railroad.
Harriet Tubman, Moses of the Underground Railroad
No one did more to help enslaved African Americans escape slavery than Harriet Tubman. People began to call her Moses for her role in guiding people to freedom in the North. But first, she had to get there herself.
In the fall of 1849, Harriet Tubman decided to escape her life as a slave. She had been born into slavery in eastern Maryland, sometime around 1820. When she heard that she would be sold to a new owner farther south, she decided to flee.
It was not an easy decision. She would have to leave her family behind, including her husband, who refused to go. She also knew that women rarely managed to escape on their own. If she were caught, she would be severely punished and perhaps killed. But she felt she had no choice. “I had reasoned this out in my mind,” she later recalled. “There was one of two things I had a right to, liberty or death; if I could not have one, I would have the other.”
Like most slaves, Tubman had led a hard life. She had been whipped repeatedly and forced to labor in the fields. She once suffered a near-fatal injury when an overseer struck her in the head with a lead weight. For the rest of her life, she would periodically and unexpectedly fall into a deep sleep. But her experiences also gave her strength and taught her how to survive. She would need that strength on her flight north.
Tubman left at night, under cover of darkness. She had no idea
wncic lu go, uw rorrunately there were people to help her. They wer part of the Underground Railroad, the name people gave to a netwc of safe houses and escape routes leading to the North. The safe hous were known as “stations” and the people who ran them as “stationmasters.” These men and women—and sometimes children—put th lives at risk to help slaves escape to freedom.
Not wanting to endanger those who helped her, Tubman never r vealed the details of her escape. But she probably took a route headi northeast to Delaware and then to Pennsylvania. It was a journey si would take many times later, when she had become the most famou “conductor” on the Underground Railroad.

. - WWMVII I
Tubmans first stop was the home of a sympathetic white woman1 lived nearby. This woman told her how to find the nearest safe hoi Tubman walked through the night to get there. When she arrived woman opened the door, handed her a broom, and told her to swc the yard. This puzzled Tubman until she realized that playing the of a black servant would help avoid suspicion.
390 Chapter 20
When the woman’s husband came home that evening, he hid Tubman in his wagon, drove her out of town, and dropped her off with directions to the next safe house. For the rest of her journey, Tubman went from one “station” to the next at night and hid during the day.
Most of the time she traveled on foot, staying out of sight. Slave catchers were a real danger, so she avoided roads and listened for the sound of bloodhounds on her trail. She knew that one careless mistake could lead to her capture.
She left Maryland and crossed into Delaware. But she was still not safe. Although Delaware was a free state, slave catchers worked there, and many people would turn over a fugitive for the reward money.
Finally, after two or three weeks on the run, Tubman crossed the Pennsylvania border, a dividing line between North and South. Now she was truly free. Years later she recalled that moment:
Hooked at my hands to see if I was the same person. There was such a glory over everything. The sun came like gold through the trees and over the fields, and I felt like I was in heaven.
Refuge in Philadelphia
Tubman went to Philadelphia, which was then home to thousands of African Americans, including many escaped slaves. The city had a strong abolitionist community and was a center of the Underground Railroad. Tubman soon found work and settled into her new life.
But she would not remain at rest for long. She missed her family in Maryland and could not bear the idea that they were still living in slavery. “I was free,” she said, “and they should be free.
Escaping slaves fled slavery any way they could. In this painting, "conductors" help men, women, and children from boats and into wagons that would take them farther north.
Gra^9eV
Born free in New Jersey, abolitionist William Still played a central role in the Underground Railroad. He interviewed every escaping slave he met. The detailed records he kept are an invaluable source of information today.
ion. New York
/rem ttie subscriber, oi» ‘	jromao,
bout&£ or*
Riding the Liberty Lines
By the fall of 1850, Tubman decided to act. She had learned that one of her sister’s daughters, a niece named Kizzy, was going to be sold south. Kizzy had two children, and Tubman was determined to rescue all three of them. No one knows exactly how she did it, but Harriet managed to slip into Maryland and bring all of them north.
The following spring, she made another trip, this time to get one of her brothers. A few months later, she brought back a second brother, along with ten other people. Eventually she would rescue most of her family, including her elderly parents. She took most of them to Canada, where they could not be seized by slave catchers and returned to their owners.
Tubman could not have made these trips without the help of the Underground Railroad. She followed routes, known as “liberty lines,” and made use of Underground Railroad safe houses. Some of these houses had tunnels and secret closets where fugitives could hide.
She also relied on “agents” such as Thomas Garrett and William Still. Garrett was a white stationmaster in Wilmington, Delaware, who helped more than 2,500 slaves escape from the South. Still, an African American, was an important leader of the antislavery movement in Philadelphia. These and other members of the Underground Railroad were critical to Tubman’s success over the years.
Another secret to her success was her methods. She usually made her trips in the fall and winter, when the nights were long and people tended to stay indoors. She always set out on a Saturday night. Sunday was usually a slave’s only day off, so slave owners might not miss absent slaves until Monday morning. When nearing a hiding place where fugitives were waiting, Tubman would sing a special song. These songs were a kind of code to signal her presence or to provide instructions.
Sometimes she wore disguises, such as men’s clothing. Once, when she ran into a former owner, she pulled her hat over her face and pretended to read a newspaper. The man, who assumed his former slave could not read, never realized who she was.
One admirer recalled, “She could elude patrols and pursuers with as much ease and unconcern as an eagle would soar through the heavens.” She was . also fearless. When she developed a bad toothache 'tea during one escape, she used a pistol to knock her ins to tCeth °Ut and ease Pain-
».) !Ter-cook. and left, a dark fwMkc bad other • thdlurx if taken dollar* if token out	ci
6 owners put up wanted posters for the return of runaway slaves. Agents forthe Underground Railroad sometimes tore the posters down to help slaves escape.
392 Chapter 20
The Rescue of Joe Bailey
Between 1852 and 1860, Tubman made one or more trips a year into the South. Blacks soon began calling her Moses, the leader who guided her people to freedom. As Moses’s reputation grew, slave owners demanded the capture of this mysterious person who was leading their slaves away. But they did not know who Moses was or even that she was a woman.
On one trip in November 1856, Tubman brought five people north, including a man named Joe Bailey. Bailey was highly valued by his owner, who offered $1,500 for his return. A $12,000 bounty was also placed on the head of “Moses.”
After a risky escape from Maryland, Tubman and her party reached the outskirts of Wilmington. There, Thomas Garrett hid them under a wagonload of hay and helped them get through the city. From there, they went to Philadelphia and New York, on their way to Canada.
Bailey got a shock in New York, however. There, a man identified him from a poster advertising a reward for his capture. Fortunately, the man was an abolitionist. Nonetheless, Bailey was plunged into gloom, fearing he would never make it out of the country without getting caught. He failed to cheer up for the rest of the journey, even refusing to look as he passed by Niagara Falls and crossed into Canada.
At that point, Tubman shook him, saying, “Joe, you’re free!’ Bailey looked up, saw where he was, and burst into tears. Then he began to sing:
Glory to God and Jesus too;
One more soul is safe!
Oh, go and carry the news;
One more soul got safe!
In 1978, the U.S. Postal Service honored Harriet Tubman with a stamp. To former slaves like the men and women in the photograph below, Tubman (far left) was a hero in her own time.
	
( ..
Tubman's Legacy
It is said that Harriet Tubman made almost 20 trips on the Underground Railroad and freed more than 300 people. In all of her journeys, she said, “I never ran my train off the track, and I never lost a passenger. She made her last trip shortly before the outbreak of the Civil War, in 1861.
During the war, she joined the Union cause as a nurse and a spy. On one raid into South Carolina, she helped free several hundred slaves from captivity.
After the war, Tubman became a strong voice in the fight for women’s rights and racial justice. But it was her daring work with the Underground Railroad that made her a great hero and liberator of her people.
Black Heritage USA 13c


African Americans in the Mid-1800s
393
Unit 6 Timeline Challenge
Americans in the Mid-1800s
1793
Invention of the Cotton Gin
Eli Whitney invents the cotton gin. Cotton becomes the most profitable cash crop in the South and transforms the South's economy and society.
1817
Work Begins on the Erie Canal
Completed in 1825, the Erie Canal provides the first allwater link between farms on the Central Plains and East Coast cities.

1806
Congress Approves National Road
Congress authorizes the building of the National Road. By 1841, the road extends from Cumberland, Maryland, to Vandalia, Illinois.
About 1820-1870 The Industrial Revolution
The United States undergoes an Industrial Revolution, which results in the growth of industry, urbanization, and a more modern transportation system.
1800-1840
Second Great Awakening
The nation experiences a revival of religious feeling that inspires many Americans to work for the improvement of society.
394 Unit 6
1831
Founding of The Liberator
William Lloyd Garrison starts the abolitionist newspaper The Liberator. In its weekly issues, he calls for the immediate freeing of all slaves.
4'
1837
Horace Mann Campaigns for Public Schools
Horace Mann becomes the Massachusetts state supervisor of education and calls for the establishment of public schools and increased pay forteachers.
1849
Harriet Tubman Escapes Slavery
Harriet Tubman escapes from a slave plantation in Maryland. She later guides more than 200 slaves to freedom on the Underground Railroad.
1854
Walden Is Published
Transcendentalist Henry David Thoreau publishes Walden, a reflection on the meaning of life, society, nature, and the human spirit.
'1835
1840
1845
1850,
1855
1860
1865
1870
1831
Nat Turners Rebellion
Nat Turner leads a slave uprising in Virginia. The rebellion results in the passage of strict slave codes.
1847
Frederick Douglass Establishes The North Star
Frederick Douglas founds The North Star, an antislavery newspaper. The newspaper lends support to other reform movements as well.
1848
Seneca Falls Convention
The Women's Rights Convention takes place in Seneca Falls, New York. Many participants sign the Declaration of Sentiments, which demands equal rights for women.
Americans in the Mid-1800s 395
Unit 7
’k ;	■ - •	1
•* v 'A
» z

& • >

?%■;
* ' . • /.;
**'!s
The Union Challenged
21	A Dividing Nation
22	The Civil War
23	The Reconstruction Era
“K



-U/t? .


4\. ’’' „W -
C \


*' *‘

’ fck>
X'O
s.,


7 i

,'/Ka>
between 1861 and 1865. Shown here is the site of the Battle of Gettysburg, which took place in Pennsylvania.
396 Unit 7
g	1	1		|H	Unit 7 Setting the Stage	111 ■si llllfc ■
	1	1	II		
The United States, Mid-I

"v


urn

The Union Challenged
The maps on these two pages show the United States in mid-1850, the year tensions over slavery reached a breaking point. In this unit, you will learn why this crisis developed and how Congress handled it. You will also learn about events after 1850 that further divided the North and South and turned the dispute over slavery into war.
As the map on the opposite page shows, some states allowed slavery. Notice, however, that the same number of states banned it. This balance gave the slave states and the free states an equal number of votes in the U.S. Senate. However, as the map on this page shows, that equality did not exist in the House of Representatives, where each state's votes are based on its population.
The Constitution requires that the House and Senate agree on new laws. Southerners believed that as long as the Senate remained balanced, Congress could not pass laws to affect slavery. Then, in 1849, California asked to become a state. California's new constitution, however, banned slavery. Admitting California as a free state, many Southerners warned, would upset the equal balance between slave states and free states—making the slave states a minority.
The 1850s were one of the most troubled decades in U.S. history. Yet, they were mild compared to the 1860s, a time of war, bitterness, and the repair of a broken nation. As you explore the topics in this unit, picture what it must have been like to live during such difficult times. The era's events drew the American people into a deadly struggle over slavery, freedom, and the very survival of the nation.
The Union Challenged 399
