Chapter 26
The Great Wave of Immigration
What was life like for immigrants in the early 1900s?
26.1	Introduction
In the early 1880s, a young American Jew named Emma Lazarus saw a boatload of Jewish immigrants who had just arrived in New York City. The Jews on the boat were fleeing a religious massacre in Russia. Inspired by their suffering, Lazarus wrote a poem in which the Statue of Liberty welcomes immigrants. The poem begins,
Give me your tired, your poor,
Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free.
In 1903, a plaque inscribed with Lazarus’s poem was attached to the base of the statue. Her words expressed the hopes of millions of people who made their way to the United States during a great wave of immigration between 1880 and 1920. Over those 40 years, more than 23 million immigrants arrived in the United States. Many were escaping poverty, political violence, and religious persecution. Others came seeking economic opportunity in a land of seemingly boundless promise.
Most of the newcomers flocked to cities, where industry was booming and jobs were plentiful. The sheer number of immigrants changed the face of the nation. The newcomers often clustered in rapidly growing ethnic neighborhoods. In both New York and San Francisco, for example, “Little Italy” districts grew up alongside “Chinatowns.”
The new arrivals spurred the growth of the nation s cities and industries. Their languages, customs, music, and food made cities like New York, Chicago, and San Francisco more diverse and exciting places. Yet many native-born Americans responded to the new arrivals with suspicion and prejudice. For immigrants, these attitudes added to the challenge of starting life in a new country.
In this chapter, you will learn about the experiences and contributions of immigrant groups from around the world. You will also discover how Americans’ attitudes toward immigration changed by the 1920s.
Immigrants arriving in New York City first landed at Ellis Island, where they went through an examination process to enter the country. This portrait of a young Jewish immigrant was taken at Ellis Island in 1905.
Immigrants arriving by ship to New York City in 1915 gaze atthe Statue of Liberty.
The Great Wave of Immigration
refugee a person who flees his or her home or country to escape war, persecution, or other dangers
assimilation the process by which immigrants or other newcomers acquire the attitudes, behaviors, and cultural patterns of the society around them
26.2	Immigration from Around the Globe
Patterns of immigration to the United States changed in the 1880s. Before this time, most immigrants came from northern Europe, particularly Ireland and Germany. By 1890, most were coming from countries in southern and eastern Europe, such as Italy, Greece, Russia, and Poland. Other people came from China, Japan, Korea, and the Philippines. Still others crossed the borders from Canada and Mexico.
Many of these newcomers were refugees escaping violence or poverty in their homelands. Compared to earlier arrivals, they tended to be poorer, less well educated, and less likely to speak English. Among these refugees were many Jews and Catholics, as well as Buddhists and Confucianists—a major change for a country that had always been largely Protestant.
The Struggle for Acceptance Americans wondered how the throngs of immigrants would affect the country. Most favored the assimilation of foreign-born people into the culture of their new homeland. They expected immigrants to become “Americanized”— to talk, dress, and act like their native-born neighbors. Others believed that the new immigrants, especially nonwhites, were too “different” to be assimilated. Their prejudices were reinforced when ethnic groups clustered in their own towns or neighborhoods, in part for mutual support and in part because they were not accepted elsewhere.
Many immigrants were eager to adopt American ways. Others had little choice. Public schools taught in English, and most stores sold only American-style clothes, food, and other goods. Many employers demanded that their workers speak English on the job.
A 5^.

Latin
1921-1930
925,000
1881-1890
807,000
1991-2000
453,000
Source: National Geographic Historical Atlas of the United States, NewYork: Simon and Schuster, 2004.
This graph shows immigration to the United States from different regions of the world. Each region's period of peak immigration is labeled. For example, between 1901 and 1910 more than 2 million people came to the United States from southern Europe.
Some immigrants did cling to their own languages and ways of life. But even those who tried hardest to assimilate often met with abuse and discrimination. Immigrants also faced resentment from workers who saw them as competing for jobs.
Contributions of Immigrants The new immigrants made vital contributions to the nation’s rapidly industrializing society. As you know, immigrants helped to build the railroad. They worked in oilfields; in gold, silver, and coal mines; and in rubber and steel mills. They labored in meat-packing plants, manufacturing plants, and clothing factories. Without the immigrants’ skills and labor, the nations cities and industries would not have grown nearly as fast as they did.
Immigrants also brought a vibrant diversity to their adopted land. The United States became a society enriched by the customs, foods, languages, and faiths of people from around the globe.
26.3	Italian Immigrants
When Pascal D’Angelo heard that his father was leaving their poor Italian village to work overseas, he was angry. “America was stealing nay father from me,” he later said. His mother tried to soothe him, saying that soon Papa would return, “laden with riches. But Pascal begged his father to take him along. His father agreed. The two of them boarded a steamship bound for the United States.
The Great Wave of Immigration 51
Millions of Italian immigrants traveled by ship to the United States between 1890 and 1900. During the voyage, they endured crowded conditions and poor-quality food.
From Italy to America Like millions of other Italians, Pascal and his father came to the United States to escape poverty. In the late 1800s, much of Italy, and especially southern Italy, could not support the country’s rapidly growing population. Farmers struggled to make a living on worn-out, eroded land where crops too often failed. There were few factories to provide other jobs.
Poor immigrants like Pascal and his father usually made the ocean passage in “steerage.” Steerage was a deck, deep in the ship, that was reserved for the passengers who paid the lowest fares. These passengers were given narrow beds in crowded compartments that smelled of spoiled food, human waste, and sweating people who had nowhere to bathe.
Steerage passengers were allowed on deck only once a day. The rest of the time, they tried to amuse themselves by playing games, singing, and making music with accordions, mandolins, and other instruments.
After almost two weeks, the travelers arrived at the immigration station on Ellis Island in New York Harbor. There
they had to pass medical examinations and answer questions about how they planned to support themselves in the United States. People who did not pass these inspections could be sent home, even if other family members were allowed to enter. So many families were forced to separate that Italians started calling Ellis Island “The Island of Tears.”
u	Judged healthy and ready to work, Pascal
and his father arrived in New York City. A fellow Italian, a work agent called a padrone (puh-DROH-nee), helped them to find jobs build-m§ I™’ Padrones helped many Italian immigrants get unskilled wor ui mg sewers, subways, and roads; cleaning streets; and
T”8 T S,^r newtenementbuildings. By 1890, Italians made up p rcen o ew York’s public works employees and 99 percent of
Chicago s street workers.
who carne t ^rnm^8rants were “birds of passage”—young men
workers di H 63111 S°me m°ne^ and return home. When several co-
Italy as well “W W°rk aCCident’ PascaTs father decided to return to Italy as well. We are not better off than when we started,” he said.
514 Chapter 26
Pascal, however, decided to stay in his new country. He settled in an Italian neighborhood in New York, one of the many “Little Italys” that sprang up in U.S. cities. These mostly Italian neighborhoods bulged with residents who could afford only the cheapest tenement housing. Crowded together in tiny apartments, most families had no privacy.
Fortunately, Italian neighborhoods also offered opportunities for fun. Most Italians were Catholics who celebrated saints’ days as they had in Italy. They strung colored lights, flags, and streamers along the shops and streets. Families strolled among booths that offered food and games. Fireworks, music, and dancing reminded everyone of life back home.
Above everything else, Italians valued family closeness. Some Italian parents didn’t send their children to school because they feared that learning English would separate their children from the family. Besides, a child in school wasn’t earning money to help the family.
As a result, many immigrant children never learned the skills they needed for better jobs.
Because many Italian newcomers were poor and uneducated, Americans tended to look down on them. When a few Italians turned to crime and became notorious gangsters, some people started thinking of all Italians as criminals. As a group, however, Italian immigrants were generally more law-abiding than average Americans.
Some Americans feared that immigrants from Italy would always be poor and illiterate. Pascal D’Angelo was one of many who proved them wrong. After coming to the United States, Pascal bought himself a dictionary and learned to read and write English. In time, he became a well-known poet whose work was published in national magazines.
Italian immigrants often moved to "Little Italys" such as Mulberry Street in New York City, shown in this photograph. Here, rents were cheap and living conditions crowded.
pogrom an organized and violent persecution of a minority group
26.4	Jewish Immigrants from Eastern Europe
Maryusha Antonovksy was no more. In her place stood Mary Antin, the same immigrant Jewish girl but with a new “American” name. Mary had also bought “real American machine-made garments” to replace her “hateful” homemade European-style clothes. “I long to forget,” she said. “It is painful to be conscious of two worlds.”

When immigrants arrived at Ellis Island, they faced the dreaded medical inspection. Medical examinations were quick but thorough. Here, a new arrival undergoes an exam to checkfor eye disease.
Fleeing Persecution Mary Antin’s first world had been a Jewish village in Russia. For centuries, Russians had discriminated against Jews, who dressed, worshiped, and ate differently from their Christian neighbors. By the 1800s, Russia had hundreds of anti-Jewish laws. Jews could live only in certain areas. They couldn’t live in big cities or own land.
In 1881, assassins killed the Russian monarch Czar Alexander II. Nervous government leaders blamed Jews for his murder, even though the assassin was not Jewish. Angry Russians raged through Jewish villages, burning, looting, and killing. These attacks, called pogroms, happened repeatedly for more than 30 years. The word pogrom comes from Russian words meaning “like thunder.”
Many Jews fled such persecution, hoping to find refuge in America. Between 1881 and 1924, some 2.4 million Jews came to the United States from Russia and other countries in eastern Europe. Mary Antin’s father was one of them.
Mary’s father left for America in 1891, hoping to earn enough money to send for his family. In his first letter home, Mary sensed “an elation [joy], a hint of triumph . . . My father was inspired by a vision. He saw something—he promised us something. It was this ‘America.’”
When her father sent a steamship ticket for his family to join him, the people in Mary’s village gathered together, filled with longing. “They wanted to handle the ticket,” Mary remembered, “and mother must read them what is written on it.”
After long rides in overcrowded trains and weeks of delay, her family finally boarded a ship in Hamburg, Germany Although richer immigrants enjoyed comfortable cabins, the Antins were crowded together with hundreds of other passengers deep down in the ship. Seasick at first, they frequently came up on deck for fresh air, where “sailors and girls had a good many dances.”
516 Chapter 26
Like most European immigrants, the Antins entered the United States by way of New York Harbor. Wealthier passengers in first-class and second-class cabins were questioned briefly before being admitted to their new country. But the majority of arrivals were taken on crowded barges to the immigration station on Ellis Island. Offen they had to wait for hours while inspectors and doctors examined each person. Fortunately, most new arrivals spent less than a day on the island before proceeding to shore and the beginning of their new life in America.
Jewish Life in America From Ellis Island,
Jews headed for New York City’s Lower East Side neighborhood. There they established shops, newspapers, religious schools, and synagogues (community centers and places of worship).
The Lower East Side became the most densely populated neighborhood in the city. People lived packed into cheap tenements, often sleeping three or four to a room.
Some Jews worked as street vendors, using pushcarts to sell everything from coal to secondhand clothes. Pushcart vendors saved their money to buy horse-drawn carts and then small stores.
Although most Jews were poor, they arrived in the United States with a wide range of skills. Jews worked as cobblers, butchers, carpenters, and watchmakers. Almost half found jobs in the city’s garment factories.
Jewish immigrants did whatever they could to keep their children in school. In Europe, Jews had honored educated people, but schooling had cost money. As a result, many Jews had never learned to read and write. In America, Mary Antin wrote,
“Education was free ... It was the one thing that [my father] was able to promise us when he sent for us: surer, safer than bread or shelter.”
Parents who made a little money often sent their sons, and sometimes their daughters, to the city’s inexpensive public colleges. By 1910, more Jewish youths over the age of 16 were still in school than were young people of any other ethnic group.
Like other immigrant groups, Jews faced prejudice and discrimination. Most private schools and clubs refused to accept Jews. Hospitals would not hire Jewish doctors. The New York Bar Association would not admit Jews as lawyers. Many ads for jobs stated simply, Christians only.
Still, eastern European Jews were grateful to be in their new country. One immigrant recalled, “There were markets groaning with food and clothes ... There was no military on horseback and no whips.”
Immigrants took work into their own homes or labored in differenttypes of factories. Here, garment workers sew clothes in a tenement apartment.
The Great Wave of Immigration
Chinese immigrants were sometimes detained for several months on Angel Island before they were allowed to enter the United States. Some carved poems on the wooden walls of the crowded barracks.
26.5	Chinese Immigrants
The first Chinese immigrants came to the United States to seek gold in California. Later, many helped to build the country’s first transcontinental railroad. Some of these immigrants returned to China with money they had earned. Their good fortune inspired 16-year-old Lee Chew to leave his poor village for the United States in 1880.
Traveling to California Lee paid 50 dollars for a bunk on a crowded steamship to make the month-long voyage to San Francisco, California. On the ship, he got his first taste of foreign food and marveled at machinery he had never seen before. “The engines that moved the ship were wonderful monsters,” he wrote, “strong enough to lift mountains.”
Lee arrived just in time. In the United States, discrimination against the Chinese had been growing ever since whites had pushed Chinese off their mining claims. As the number of Chinese immigrants increased, U.S. labor leaders warned of Chinese workers who
would work for less pay than whites and take away their jobs. In 1882, Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act, which banned Chinese laborers from immigrating to the United States. The law also denied Chinese immigrants the right to become citizens.
As a result of the Chinese Exclusion Act, Chinese immigration slowed to almost nothing. Then, in 1906, an earthquake and fire destroyed much of San Francisco, including most birth records. Suddenly, many Chinese men could claim to be native-born citizens. As citizens, they were allowed to bring their wives and children to the United States.
Chinese claiming American birth started arranging for people in C ma to immigrate to the United States as their relatives. On the long i if*	the newc°mers studied hundreds of pages describing
amilies. When they reached San Francisco Bay, they threw the papers overboard.
These “paper relatives” landed at Angel Island in San Francisco Bay. me^ immigration officials “locked us up like criminals in com-
P ii * e ca8es 1° zoos, said one Chinese immigrant. Chinese usua y remained on the island for three to four weeks, but sometimes noernf tyiont^ls or even years there. To pass the time, they carved halls. One wrofcT	SiIverware smuggled from the dining
andmv f	*s on^’ because my country is weak
neW?M ? tSP°0K MyPar^s wait at the door in vain for with lonenn^^	themselves w their stShinS
518 Chapter 26
Before being allowed to leave Angel Island, each immigrant faced detailed questioning by officials. “How many steps are there in your house?” “Where do you sleep in your house?” “Who lives next door?” Then they asked a family witness from San Francisco the same questions. If the answers didn’t match, officials could deport the newcomer. Nearly one in ten Chinese who came to the United States was sent back to China.
Chinese Life in the United States When Lee Chew arrived in San Francisco, he worked first as a servant and then set up his own laundry. Many Chinese started laundries because, as Lee explained, “It requires little capital and is one of the few opportunities that are open. Men of other nationalities who are jealous of the Chinese ... have shut him out of working on farms or in factories or building railroads.”
Like Lee, most Chinese settled in city neighborhoods like San Francisco’s bustling Chinatown. Here, they could find work at Chinese laundries, restaurants, and stores. Chinese newspapers, herbal medicines, foods, and festivals provided familiarity, comfort, and support.
For many years, most Chinese immigrants were men. In 1900, only about 1 in 20 Chinese on the U.S. mainland was female. With so few women and families, the Chinese population began to decline. In 1880, about 105,000 Chinese lived in the United States. By 1920, there were 61,600.
Gradually, more women and children arrived, especially in San Francisco. Housing was closed to Chinese in most areas, so Chinatown became more and more crowded.
Chinese immigrants settled in Chinatowns like this one in San Francisco. There they preserved the culture they had left behind.
The Great Wave of Immigr;

passport a document issued by a citizen’s home government that identifies a person and permits travel to other countries
26.6	Mexican Immigrants
Soldiers were shooting all around. A flying bullet almost hit him. That was when Pablo Mares (PAH-blow MAHR-ess) decided he had to get out of Mexico. “I had to come to the United States,” he said later, “because it was impossible to live down there with so many revolutions.”
Mares had been caught in the middle of a bloody civil war. The conflict began when Mexico’s president allowed wealthy landowners to take over the lands of 6 million Indians and 8 million poor farmers. In 1910, landless farmers rebelled, breaking up large landholdings and giving the land to poor families. In response, soldiers attacked villages, killing thousands of peasants.
By 1900, railroad lines linked the United States and Mexico. Trains provided convenient transportation for Mexicans, who were free to enterthe United States without passports.
Crossing the Border The Mexican Revolution dragged on for ten years. Between 1910 and 1920, about 500,000 Mexicans entered the United States. They entered freely, without passports or money.
Many Mexicans walked hundreds of miles to reach the border, carrying all they owned on their backs. In just one day, a Texas reporter saw “hundreds of Mexicans, all journeying northward on foot, on burroback and in primitive two-wheel carts.” Others traveled north by rail. By 1900, railroad lines connected American and Mexican cities. Railroads provided both transportation and jobs for Mexican immigrants. One Mexican newspaper reported, “There is not a day in which passenger trains do not leave for the border, full of Mexican men who are going in gangs to work on railroad lines in the United States.’’
I
I
520 Chapter 26
Mexicans in America Many American employers welcomed the Mexicans. Expanding railroads and large-scale farms and ranches in the Southwest depended on laborers who were willing to work hard for little pay After Congress banned Chinese immigration in 1882, these employers looked to Mexico for new workers. “Where I came from,” said one Mexican construction worker, “I used to work ten hours for $1.25 ... Then I came here and they paid $1.25 for eight hours—it was good.”
Some Mexican immigrants found jobs with railroads, mines, factories, and canneries. But most found work in agriculture. Mexican farmworkers moved from region to region, harvesting crops as they ripened. They picked oranges in southern California, almonds in central California, and then apples in Oregon. They harvested cotton in Texas and Arizona and then moved on to sugar beets in Colorado.
Farmwork paid very little. One Texas farmer paid “Pan-cho and his whole family 60 cents a day... He worked from
Some Mexicans, such as those in this photograph, found jobs in mines. Most, however, were employed as agricultural workers.
sun to sun.” Children worked in the fields with their parents to help support their families. Few of them had a chance to attend school.
Farmworkers often lived in camps that they built near the fields. “Shelters were made of almost every conceivable thing—burlap, canvas, palm branches,” said one visitor. Some farms and ranches provided housing for their workers. Either way, these temporary homes usually lacked running water and basic sanitation.
After harvest season, farmworkers sometimes moved to nearby towns. Barrios, or Mexican neighborhoods, sprang up on the edges of cities near such farming areas as Los Angeles, California, and San Antonio, Texas. Food stands and grocery stores in the barrio offered familiar tastes and smells. Residents helped each other take care of the sick and find jobs. On Mexican religious holidays, Catholic churches held special ceremonies. On those days, the barrio was filled with singing, dancing, and fireworks.
Many Mexican immigrants originally planned to return to Mexico once the revolution was over. Whites who believed that Mexicans were taking their jobs encouraged such returns. One wrote, I wish the Mexicans could be put back in their country.
Mexicans who remained in the United States often faced strong prejudice. Compared to whites, they earned very low wages, and they had little say in their working conditions. In schools, white children were sometimes taught to “boss” their Mexican classmates, as they were expected to do when they grew up.
Despite these problems, many Mexican immigrants chose to stay. Like Isidro Osorio, a farm and railroad worker, they hoped for a better future in their new homeland. “I have worked very hard to earn my $4.00 a day,” reported Osorio. “That is why I want to give a little schooling to my children so that they won t stay like I am.
The Great Wave of Immigration
**Btun»i >.»“.rra Ti »-*,**’ trades-unlott’s. ” BSMJT' "
| ■«*«»., *.£tT"!|o.
1' D^ftSISS °F CNiHESf j B B ARBARIANS ,*TB Tta
I COUNTRY MUST St STOP#» »Y ■
B TO BALLOT « BULLET^
JSy «n »»«»«*«* **° f Ivtctoasj**^
Segkm*&
JOHN CHINAMAN SS '
AM IWAVM
HEATHEN
26.7	Closing the Door on Immigration
In 1920, a mob stormed through the Italian neighborhood of West Frankfort, a small town in Illinois. The crowd was frustrated by a mining strike and angered by bank robberies that Italian criminals were rumored to have committed. For three days, mobs beat up Italian
immigrants and burned their homes. This attack reflected a surge of nativism, or anti-immigrant feeling,
it	that peaked in the United States around this time.
The Tide Turns Against Immigrants The
United States has always been a nation of immigrants, yet time and again nativism has sparked actions and policies directed against newer arrivals. Sometimes nativism is rooted in economic competition. Sometimes it stems from ethnic, religious, and other differences. In the 1830s, for example, Protestant nativists charged that Catholic immigrants were enemies of democracy. They feared that Catholics had more loyalty to the pope in Rome, who was the head of their church, than to the U.S. government.
The surge in immigration that began in the 1880s fueled another rise in nativism. Some native-born Americans blamed immigrants for everything from slums and crime to hard times. Fearing competition for jobs, many labor leaders discriminated against nonwhites. In 1909, for example, the president of the United Mine Workers wrote of Asians that “as a race their standard of living is extremely low, and their assimilation by Americans impossible.”
Restricting Immigration 
Politicians responded to the growing prejudice against immigrants. As you have read, in 1882 Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act, banning further immigration by Chinese laborers.
In 1907, Japanese immigrants were forbidden entry to the United States. In 1917, Congress required immigrants to prove they could read and write in at least one langauge before they were allowed into the United States. 
To further limit immigration, Congress established a quota system in 1921 and refined it in 1924. Under this system, by 1927 only 150,000 immigrants were allowed to enter the United States each year. People from East Asia were completed excluded. In addition, quotas limited immigration from any one country to 2 percent of the number of people from that country who lived in the United States in 1890. Most eastern and southern Europeans had arrived after that year. As a result, most of the quota spaces were reserved for immigrants from England, Ireland, and Germany. 
This 1871 cartoon shows Columbia, a symbol of the United States, protecting a Chinese immigrantfacing discrimination. In 1882, a federal law banned immigration from China.
nativism an attitude of resentment and superiority toward foreign-born people
quota a limit based on numbers or proportions, such as the proportion of a country’s population allowed to immigrate to the United States
522 Chapter 26
Ihe new laws did not limit Mexican immigration. However, Mexicans now needed passports and visas to enter the United States. Visas allow people from other nations to stay in the United States for a limited period of time. For the first time, the nation was closing its doors.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, you read about the great wave of immigration to the United States between 1880 and 1920.
Immigrants from Around the Globe The immigrants of this period were far more diverse than earlier arrivals. Many were refugees escaping poverty, wars, or persecution. Others were drawn by the promise of economic opportunity. With their skills and labor, these new immigrants helped build the nation’s booming cities and industries. But they also faced many challenges, including the tension between assimilation and preserving their way of life.
Italian Immigrants Millions of Italians came to the United States to escape poverty. Many settled in cities, where they lived in mostly Italian neighborhoods.
Jewish Immigrants from Eastern Europe Between 1881 and 1924, some 2.4 million Jews came to the United States from Russia and other countries. Many came to escape persecution in their home countries.
Chinese Immigrants People from China had come to the United States since the late 1860s. As the number of Chinese immigrants increased, so too did discrimination against them. In 1882, Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act.
Mexican Immigrants Many Mexicans came to the United States between 1910 and 1920, during the years of the Mexican Revolution. Most found work in agriculture, although the work paid very little.
Closing the Door on Immigration
In the 1920s, nativism led Congress to limit the number of foreigners who would be allowed into the United States. Quotas brought an end to the great wave of immigration. By then, the United States had become a far more diverse country.
The great wave of immigration during the late 19th century created a nation of rich, diverse cultures. People from many backgrounds came together and became Americans. In this photograph, a mix of immigrants are in class together learning English.
Ihe Great Wave of Immigration
J
Reading Further
More than a million immigrants settle in the United States every year. They come from countries around the world A large percentage of them are young people like Carmen and Fidinarivo, who proudly hold their newly acquired certificates of U.S. citizenship.
Young Immigrants Today
Throughout its history, the United States has been a nation of immigrants. Immigrants continue to come here for the same reasons they always have. Some are fleeing oppression or war. Others are simply seeking a better life, with more opportunities and greater freedom. Many of these immigrants are young people.
Manyang came to the United States in 2001, at the age of 18. He was a refugee from the African country of Sudan. For Manyang, coming to this country was an escape from the violence of war.
Manyang was just six years old when gunmen raided his village in southern Sudan. Civil war had been raging in Sudan for years. Now, the fighting had come to Manyang’s village. Hearing gunshots, he ran out of his house, looking for his parents. In that moment, he saw his father shot dead.
!
Manyang escaped his village unharmed. He could not find his mother or his brothers and sisters, but he did find his uncle Malic. Together, they joined other refugees on a long trek to neighboring Ethiopia. After two months of walking, starving and exhausted, they arrived at a United Nations refugee camp. There they received food, clothing, and shelter.
Several years later, however, civil war broke out in Ethiopia. Pursued by rebel soldiers, the refugees fled back to Sudan. At one point, Manyang had to cross a river teeming with crocodiles. He pulled himself across the river on a rope, but his uncle was killed by the rebels.
Eventually, Manyang arrived at another UN camp, this time in Kenya. He stayed there for nine years. Life was hard in the camp. Foot was scarce, and the refugees got just one meal a day. But Manyang wa; able to go to school. He began to study English and math. He realized that education could be his route to a better life.
One day, Manyang learned that the United States was allowing some boys like him to immigrate. Americans called them the “Lost Boys because they had lost their families and their country. Manyang told his story to immigration officials. Finally, his application was accepted. In May 2001, he came to the United States to begin a new life.
Manyang was “adopted” by a church in Connecticut. With the support of church members, he continued his schooling. But it was not easy. Although Manyang had studied hard in Kenya, his schooling there was very different from an American education. Once again* Manyang worked hard to be successful. At the graduation ceremony,
after he passed his courses, Manyang spoke about the importance of education in his life.
I
524 Chapter 26
Since then, Manyang has entered college and become an American citizen. One day, he hopes to become a lawyer and to help his people in Sudan. But he will always appreciate what life in the United States has given him and other Lost Boys. “Lots of people opened their hearts and homes to us,” he says. “I will never forget.”
Modern Immigration
Manyang is one of millions of immigrants who have come to this country in recent decades. Since 1970, the immigrant population in the United States has more than tripled. By 2008, about 38 million immigrants lived here. That is the largest number in the nation s history.
This new wave of immigration differs from the last great wave in the late 1800s and early 1900s. Then, most immigrants came from Southern and Eastern Europe.
Today, most come from Latin America and Asia, with smaller numbers from Africa and the Middle East.
Despite high levels of immigration, immigrants still make up a smaller share of the U.S. population than they did in 1900. At that time, around 15 percent of all U.S. residents were foreign born. Today, that figure is approximately 12 percent.
Many of the new immigrants are young. A survey taken in the 1990s showed that 45 percent were under the age of 30. In general, the immigrant population is younger than the American population as a whole.
After the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the United States tightened immigration controls. More immigrants were detained and deported. Many people felt that discrimination against immigrants was on the rise. In a 2009 survey of immigrants, however, most said they were glad they had come to the United States. They said their lives had improved as a result. Most of them hoped to make this country their permanent home.
When Manyang came to the United States, he said, "From the first, our aim was to get an education." Holding his high school diploma after graduation, he knew he had succeeded in his dream.
Inayet's Story
Inayet is an Afghan Muslim who came to this country in 1991. He tells his story in the book Kids Like Me: Voices of the Immigrant Experience by Judith M. Blohm and Terri Lapinsky.
Inayet’s parents are from Afghanistan. They fled to Pakistan in the 1980s after the Soviet Union invaded their country. Inayet was born in a refugee camp, where he spent the first eight years of his life before coming to the United States. Although he attended school in the camp, it was a terrible experience. The teachers seemed to care little about education and often beat the students.
The Great Wave of Immigration 52!
!
The United Nations and other relief agencies operate refugee camps around the world. These camps help millions of people displaced by war. Manyang, Inayet, and Pang Houa all spent years in camps like this one.
i
When Inayet started school here, he was surprised that his teachers did not hit him. He soon realized that education could help him succeed in life. Like Manyang, he graduated from high school and went on to college.
Everything did not go easily for Inayet, however. Some students were mean to him. They did not understand his culture and customs and told him to go back to his own country Some also asked him if he was a terrorist. Despite these difficulties, Inayet grew to appreciate the advantages of life in the United States. Here, he says, people have economic opportunities and freedom of religion. Here, he believes, people have the “freedom to live.”
I i i i i !
■ «iik| i iuu<j oiory
Pang Houa, a Hmong (MUNG) from Southeast Asia, was also born in a refugee camp. In her case, the camp was in Thailand. Her parents fled there from Laos just after the Vietnam War. She came to the United States in 1984, when she was four years old.
In Kids Like Me, Pang Houa described how she and her family set tied in Minnesota, where many Hmong immigrants now live. She went to school, first with other Hmong children and then with Americans. She did well in school and was happy. She said she never felt discrimination from her classmates. In fact, when she later went to college she said that other students found her background fascinating. 'IW wanted to know more about Hmong culture and customs.
526 Chapter 26
She got a surprise when she went to France to study for a while, however. Even though she tried to blend in, she realized that she spoke and acted like any other American. She had arrived in the United States as an immigrant, but she no longer felt like one. She had become an American.
Yulia's Story
Yulia came to the United States from Russia when she was 16 years old. Her parents wanted to give her and her siblings a better future.
Two years later, she told her story to author Marina Budhos for the bookRem/x: Conversations with Immigrant Teenagers.
In many ways, Yulia adapted quickly to life in this country. She went to school, made friends, and learned English. In fact, she adapted much faster than her parents. While she was becoming more American, her parents remained tied to their Russian values.
This led to tensions between Yulia and her mother. In Russia, teenage girls have less freedom than they do in the United States. When Yulia began to go out with her friends, her mother did not like it. “She treats me like a child,” Yulia said.
Yulia did not blame her mother, though. She understood that problems like this sometimes arise between parents and children. She also respected her mother and wanted to stay close to her family. She tried to find a way to honor her mother’s values while also making a new life for herself in America.
rito's Story
rito was four when he came to the United States from Mexico. His ather was an American citizen, living in California. Tito and his nother and brothers moved north to join him. Ten years later, vhen Tito was 14, Janet Bode interviewed him for her book Vew Kids in Town.
Tito lived in a rough neighborhood in Los Angeles, where irug dealers and gangs were common. But Tito’s parents were trict. With their help, he managed to avoid trouble and stay n school.
Tito’s family blended many aspects of Mexican and American culture. They spoke both English and Spanish at lome. Tito was proud of his Mexican heritage, but he also mew that he was an American. What matters most, he says, s to know who you are.
Tito believes that Mexican immigrants make an impor-ant contribution to American life. He points out that the Jnited States is made up of people from many countries and ultures. In an ideal society, he says, there s a little bit of very culture and it goes together just right.” In his view, mmigrants have helped the United States grow and prosper.
Atthis California polling place, a sign informs voters in seven languages: English, Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Spanish, Tagalog, and Vietnamese.
The Great Wave of Immigrati
Unit 8 Timeline Challenge
Migration and Industry
1879
Invention of the Lightbulb
Thomas Edison's workshop invents the first practical electric lightbulb. By the end of the 1880s, small electrical stations provide power to city blocks in a number of cities.
1848
Gold Rush Begins
Gold is discovered in California. Miners from all over the world flock to the West in hopes of becoming rich.
1876
Battle of the Little Big Horn
Sioux and Cheyenne Indians successfully fight off an attack by the U.S. Army in the Battle of the Little Big Horn, also known as Custer's Last Stand. All the soldiers in the battle are killed.
1860-1890
Plains Indians Forced onto Reservations
The government relocates Plains Indians onto reservations to make room for continued settlement of the West. Some Indian groups resist and clash with government forces.
1862
Homestead Act
The Homestead Act gives 160 acres of land in the West to settlers willing to work the land.
1869
Transcontinental Railroad Completed
The Transcontinental Railroad is completed, connecting the Atlantic and Pacific coasts and opening the West to further development.
1886
Haymarket Square Riot
Fighting erupts and several people are killed at a rally for an eight-hour workday at Haymarket Square in Chicago. It is not until 1938 that most workers win the right to an eight-hour workday.
1903
First Flight
The Wright brothers successfully pilot the first airplane in Kitty Hawk, North Carolina. The flight spurs worldwide interest in flying.

1921
Immigrant Quota System
Congress establishes a quota system restricting the number of immigrants allowed into the United States each year.


1895
1900
1905
1910
1915
1925
1930
1880-1920
Immigration's High Tide
More than 23 million immigrants arrive in the United States. Most flock to cities, where industry is booming and jobs are plentiful.
1892
Homestead Plant Strike
Workers striking for better working conditions clash with armed guards at a Carnegie steel plant in Homestead, Pennsylvania. The plant soon reopens with strikebreakers, and the union collapses.
1911
Triangle Shirtwaist Factory Fire
A fire at the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory in New York City kills 146 girls and women. The tragedy brings to light the poor working conditions in urban factories.
Migration and Industry 529
Unit 9 Setting the Stage
A Modern Nation Emerges
The United States grew dramatically in the decades after the Civil War. In this unit, you will learn about American expansion overseas and reforms at home that resulted, in part, because of that growth.
The map below shows the places that came under U.S. control following the Civil War.
By the late 1800s, American companies were seeking new markets for their products and new sources of raw materials. That quest was
connected to the Pacific islands highlighted on the map. It was also related to a massive engineering project that took place far from the United States—the digging of the Panama Canal in the Central American country of Panama.
If U.S. expansion in the Pacific can be linked to trade, in the Caribbean it can be linked to democratic ideals. In this unit, you will read how Americans' call for self-government for the people of Cuba drew the United States into a war with Spain. However, as you will also learn, those ideals were dashed by events following the war.


U.S. Territorial Expansion, 1867-1903

x
s
PACIFIC
OCEAN
9	1,000	2,000 miles
|---------1-----1---,----------_i
0	1,000	2,000 kilometers
Robinson Projection

ATLANTA
OCEAN
As the nation was expanding its territories in other parts of the world, some Americans were working to improve life at home. By 1900, much of the work that fueled the nation's industrial growth was performed by young children for low pay. Half of American citizens still could not vote, and those who could had to choose between candidates picked by political party leaders. By 1920, great progress had been made in all three areas. As you read this unit, you will learn how these and other important reforms were achieved.
Reforms in 1900 and 1920
	1900	1920
States that allowed women to vote	4	all
States that allowed voters to choose nominees for presidential office	0	20
States that set minimum age limits for child workers in factories	24	all
