Chapter 29
Linking Past to Present
What changes since 1914 have shaped how we live today?
29.1	Introduction
Henry Ford was a man with a vision. He wanted to build a motorcar “so low in price that no man making a good salary will be unable to own one.”
The result was the Model T, a car, Ford said, “large enough for the family, but small enough for the individual to run and care for.”
To make the Model T affordable, Ford needed a new way to put cars together. At first, workers built Model Ts by hand, a task that took over 12 hours.
To reduce this time, Ford designed a moving assembly line. The assembly line moved cars from worker to worker to worker, with each worker adding another part. The time needed to assemble a car dropped to under 6 hours. With this faster assembly time, Ford was able to reduce the price of the Model T from around $850 in 1908 to $360 by 1916.
When Ford unveiled his assembly line in 1914, he made a stunning announcement. He was more than doubling his workers’ wages, to $5.00 a day. It was a brilliant move. High pay kept Ford s workers on the job. It also made it possible for them to buy the cars they produced. By 1918, half of all cars sold in the United States were Model T Fords.
Today, the Ford Motor Company is still making motorcars for the multitudes.” But the world in which the company operates is very dif-
ferent. In 1914, the United States was home to just 99 million people. Most people worked on farms or in factories. People moved slowly by foot, horse, or rail. Only the fortunate few earned enough money to afford cars.
In contrast, the United States today has a population of more than 300 million people. Relatively few work on farms or in factories. And most families now consider a car—once a luxury—a necessity. In this chapter, you will learn how changes like these came about and how they have shaped life in the 21st century.
Cars crossing the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge at sunsetcrea^® a stream of light. How have changes like cars shaped the nation since
Compare this 1912 photograph of San Francisco with the one on the opposite page. Here we see early cars as well as horse-drawn wagons. Some of these buildings were considered skyscrapers in the early 1900s.
Linking Past to Present
More than 200,000 people heard Martin Luther King's speech during the 1963 March on Washington. “I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed," he said. "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal."
29.2	Securing Equal Rights and Opportunities
Had you been able to visit the Ford Motor Company in 1914, you would have seen a workforce of white men. The same would have been true in most factories. Women might be employed as garment workers or as office help. But the factory floor was a man’s world— so long as the men were white.
At a Ford factory today, you would see a far more diverse workforce. Women and men of all races and nationalities now work throughout the company. This change did not just happen. It is the result of a long struggle for equal rights and opportunities.
African Americans Demand Equal Rights For African Americans, the end of slavery had brought freedom, but not equality. During Reconstruction, racial segregation became a way of life in the South. Blacks could not attend the same schools or eat in the same restaurants as whites. Few blacks could vote, much less run for public office. Many African Americans migrated to the North and West to escape such discri-
mination. However, no part of the country was free from racism.
A major turning point in African American’s struggle for equality came in 1954. That year, a lawsuit known as Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas reached the Supreme Court. The question before the Court was whether segregated schools violated the Fourteenth Amendment. This amendment guarantees all citizens “equal protection of the laws.” In a landmark decision, the Court stated that separate educational facilities are inherently unequal.”
A second major turning point came in 1955. It was sparked by the arrest of Rosa Parks, a black seamstress who was on her way home rom work in Montgomery, Alabama. Parks’s crime was refusing to give up her seat on a crowded bus to a white passenger. Montgomerys ac residents organized a bus boycott to protest the arrest. They re use to ride city buses until black passengers were treated as the equals of white passengers.
^Montgomery Bus Boycott gave rise to a new civil rights move-T i C movement s leader was a young minister named Martin
mg Jr. King organized marches and protests across the South.
576 Chapter 29
These events awakened the nation to the injustice of both racism and racial segregation.
In 1963, black and white protesters marched on Washington, D.C., to demand action by Congress. Over the next two years, Congress enacted two landmark civil rights laws. The first of these laws, the Civil Rights Act of 1964, banned segregation in public places based on race, gender, religion, or nationality. It also outlawed discrimination in employment based on these same factors.
The second law, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, banned practices that had kept African Americans from voting in many Southern states. In Mississippi, for example, the percentage of black adults registered to vote rose from 7 percent in 1964 to 82 percent by 2008.
Mexican Americans Fight for Economic Justice Mexican Americans also suffered from racism. Many could only find jobs as farmworkers. They worked long hours tending and picking crops for little pay.
Mexican Americans found a champion in Cesar Chavez. In 1962, along with Dolores Huerta, Chavez organized a labor union later known as the United Farm Workers (UFW). In 1968, Chavez called for a nationwide boycott of California table grapes. The boycott put pressure on grape growers to bargain with the UFW. In 1970, the growers agreed to most of the workers’ demands for better pay and working conditions. The UFW’s success inspired farmworkers to organize in other states.
Civil rights and farm labor leader Cesar Chavez is shown here at a rally in 1966. A migrantfarm worker himself, Chavez founded a labor union that later became the United Farm Workers. For his support of working people, Chavez was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom.
feminist a person who supports the equality of women with men
I i I
Women Fight for Equality The 1960s and 1970s saw the rise of a new women’s movement. Much of the credit for sparking this movement goes to Betty Friedan. Her 1963 book, The Feminine Mystique, challenged the idea that women should be content as stay-at-home wives and mothers. Friedan argued that women should be free to pursue careers outside the home, just as men did.
Friedan and other feminists founded the National Organization for Women in 1966. Since then, NOW has worked for the equal treatment of women in all areas of life. For millions of women, equality means the freedom to work at any job. In 1950, women made up about 30 percent of the workforce, but earned only about 60 cents for every dollar that men doing the same work earned. By 2009, women made up nearly half of the workforce, but had yet to close the wage gap. That year, women earned about 80 cents compared to a dollar earned by men in the same jobs.
Women and Minorities Enter Politics Women also began to compete with men in politics. In 1960, no state had a woman governor. By 2010, six states had governors who were women, with that number expected to increase. Women also held a quarter of the seats in state legislatures. African Americans and Latinos saw similar gains (Latinos are people whose families come from Mexico, Central Ameri ca, or South America.) In 1971, African Americans and Latinos held only 19 seats in Congress. By 2010, that number had risen to 73.
In 2008, Barack Obama became the first African American nominated to run for president. In his victory speech, Obama said,
If there is anyone out there who still doubts that America is a place where all things are possible, who still wonders if the dream of our founders is alive in our time, who still questions the power of our democracy, tonight is your answer.
On Election Day, more than 69 million Americans cast votes to make Obama the first African American president of the United States.
In 2009, Barack Obama became the nation's first African American president. "Our challenges may be new, he said at his inauguration. "Butthose values upon which our success depends—honesty and hard work, courage and fair play, tolerance and curiosity, loyalty and patriotism—these things. . • have been the quiet force of progress throughout our history."
578 Chapter 29
29.3	Innovations Change Daily Life
The first Model Ts rolling off Ford’s moving assembly line in 1914 were relatively simple machines. The car had a top speed of 45 miles per hour. Its only safety features were headlamps and brakes. Even so, an affordable car was an innovation, or new idea, that would change how Americans lived. Other innovations would soon follow.
Airplanes dramatically decreased travel time, though passengers may not always feel that way as they move through airport security checkpoints. Terrorist threats in the 21st century have caused airports to tighten security.
Faster, Easier Ways to Travel The Model T ended America’s horse-and-buggy era. Cars were faster and easier to manage than horse-drawn buggies. People with cars could travel longer distances to work or shop. This allowed families to move out of crowded cities into suburbs. Cars also changed how people used their leisure time. Families piled into cars to see the country on Sunday drives or to take vacation trips to new places.
The growing popularity of cars gave rise to new industries. Gas stations, repair shops, and tourist stops sprang up along newly paved roads. By the mid-1920s, one out of eight American workers had a job related to the automobile industry. By 2008, that number had dropped only slightly, to about one in ten.
Another innovation, the airplane, cut travel times between distant cities. The world’s first scheduled airline service opened in Florida in 1914. The St. Petersburg-Tampa Airboat Line flew passengers between those two cities in 22 minutes. The same journey took 12 hours by train. The Airboat Line flew only 1,205 passengers that first year. Soon, though, more people were traveling by air than rail. In 2008, airlines carried 650 million passengers from one U.S. city to another.
Linking Past to Present 5'
mass media forms of communication that reach large audiences
New Mass Media Other innovations gave rise to new mass media, or means of communicating with large audiences. One form of mass media was the motion picture. In 1914, most Americans had never seen a full-length movie. But during the 1920s, going to the movies became a national pastime. It still is. In 2009, Americans bought 1.47 billion movie tickets.
The next new mass media was radio. The nation’s first commercial radio stations began broadcasting in 1920. Families were soon organizing their lives so that they could hear their favorite radio programs. By 1945, nearly every American home had a radio set. But by then, another new media had appeared: television.
In 1946, the first regularly scheduled television programs began broadcasting. The new media offered viewers a window on the world. It also entertained them. By 2010, the average American was watching more than four and a half hours of television a day. Altogether, Americans spend 250 billion hours a year watching TV.
An assembly line operated by robots puts pickup trucks together at a U.S. auto plant. Automated factories have helped change the way Americans work. Lower labor costs overseas are another factor contributing to the shift from manufacturing to service jobs.
29.4	America's Changing Economy
When the first gas-powered cars appeared in the late 1800s, the United States was still a nation of farms. By the time Model Ts began rolling off Ford’s assembly line, the Industrial Revolution had shifted the economy from agriculture to manufacturing. More economic changes lay ahead.
From a Manufacturing to a Service Economy The next major change was a shift from a manufacturing to a service economy. After growing for decades, the number of factory jobs began to shrink after 1960. About 30 percent of the workforce had factory jobs that year.
By 2009, only 9 percent of workers were employed in factories.
Several factors contributed to this shift. One was automation. Automation involves replacing workers with machines. In automobile plants, for example, robots took over jobs once done by people.
A second factor was the growth of worldwide trade, part of a trend known as globalization. This trend began in 1947 with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). Over the next half-century, GATT removed trade barriers between nations. As cross-border trade became easier, many U.S. companies moved factories to countries with lower labor costs. This left fewer manufacturing jobs in the United States.
Many workers who lost factory jobs found work in the service sector, the part of the economy that provides services rather than goods. Service workers include teachers, doctors, mechanics, and salespeople. By 2010, about 36 percent of the workforce held jobs in the service sector.
globalization an increase in the flow of people, money, ideas, and trade goods across national boundaries
service sector the part of the economy that provides services instead of producing goods
knowledge worker a person whose main job is working with ideas, information, and technology
The Rise of Knowledge Workers The growing service sector also includes knowledge workers. Knowledge workers create and work with ideas and information. Examples include writers, scientists, and engineers. In 1914, knowledge workers were a small part of the workforce. Today, about a third of all workers are knowledge workers.
The rise of knowledge workers was assisted by the invention of the computer. In 1981, the first personal computers (PCs) appeared in offices. PCs put vast amounts of information at a worker’s fingertips.
PCs became even more useful in the 1990s when they were linked together via the Internet and World Wide Web. When the Web was opened up to the public in 1991, few U.S. households had Internet access. By 2007, close to two-thirds did. With this shift, the U.S. economy had entered an “information age.’
Americans born after 1991 have never known a world without the Internet. They consider devices such as computerized phones with Web access and hundreds of thousands of applications a part of everyday life.
Linking Past to Present
UNITED STATES
Here, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations Susan Rice speaks atthe UN. The United Nations was formed in 1945, immediately after World War II, as an international organization dedicated to promoting world peace and security. Today, nearly every country is a member of the UN.
communism an economic or political system in which the government owns all property and controls economic activity
29.5	The United States Enters the World Stage
In 1914, war broke out in Europe. The United States entered the war in early 1917. Eight million people would die before the guns finally fell silent in 1918.
Two World Wars World War I marked America’s entry onto the world stage as a major power. When the war ended, Americans hoped it would be the “war to end all wars.” These hopes vanished when a second global conflict broke out in 1939.
The United States stayed out of this war for two years. Then, on December 7, 1941, Japanese warplanes attacked a U.S. naval base in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. The growing conflict soon engulfed most of Europe and Asia. World War II finally ended when the United States dropped atomic bombs on two Japanese cities. After witnessing the destruction caused by this terrifying new weapon, Japan surrendered.
At the war’s end, the United States took the lead in founding a new world organization, the United Nations. The
primary purpose of the UN is “to maintain international peace.”
By 2010, the UN had grown from its 51 founding members in 1945 to 192 member nations.
Cold War Conflicts Two nations emerged from World War II as superpowers: the United States and the Soviet Union. By 1947, these two superpowers were locked in a grim struggle for power. Americans saw this struggle as a fight for freedom and democracy. The Soviet Union saw it as a fight to expand communism. Communism is an economic or political system in which the government owns all property and controls the economy. Because this struggle was waged without warfare, it is called the Cold War.
The Cold War lasted 44 years. During this time, the United States sent troops to two Asian nations to stop the spread of communism. The Korean War (1950-1953) left the Korean Peninsula divided into two countries, a communist North Korea and a noncommunist South
orea. e Vietnam War (1954-1975) ended with communists taking control of Vietnam.
In 1991, the Soviet Union collapsed, breaking apart to form 15 new nations This event ended the Cold War and left the United States as the world s sole remaining superpower.
582 Chapter 29
Facing New Global Challenges
Since 1991, the United States has turned its attention to new global challenges. It has, for example, joined with other nations to assist the billion people around the world who live on less than $1.25 a day.
On September 11, 2001, a shocked nation watched as passenger planes hijacked by terrorists flew into the two World Trade Center towers in New York City and the Pentagon in Washington, D.C. In response,
President George W. Bush declared a “war on terror.” That war has taken U.S. troops
into Iraq and Afghanistan. In both countries, U.S. forces have worked to root out groups committed to the destruction of the United States and its allies.
The United States is also working with other nations to deal with climate change. In 1988, the public became concerned about scientists’ observations that Earth’s climate was growing warmer at an alarming rate. The main reason for this warming, they suggested, is the burning of fuels such as oil, gas, and coal that release carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. As Earth gets hotter, they warned, disasters like hurricanes, floods, and droughts may become more frequent. Preventing such disasters has become one of the greatest global challenges of the 21st century.
A team from the University of Michigan celebrates winning the North American Solar Car Challenge, a cross-country competition to build and race solar-powered cars. Finding new sources of energy is one of the challenges Americans face today.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, you learned about some of the changes that have shaped life in the United States since 1914.
Securing Equal Rights and Opportunities In 1914, white men dominated the workforce and political life. After much struggle, women and men of all races have won the right to vote and compete as equals in all areas of life.
Innovations Change Daily Life Cars and airplanes made travel faster and easier. Motion pictures created a new form of entertainment. Radio and television brought the world into every home.
America’s Changing Economy During the first half of the last century, the United States shifted from an agricultural to an industrial economy. During the second half, it shifted again to a service economy. By the dawn of the 21st century, the economy had entered information age.
The United States Enters the World Stage In 1914, the United States was just beginning to move onto the world stage. By the turn of the 21st century, it was the world’s sole superpower. In the 21st century, new ideas and challenges will continue to change the way we live.
Linking Past to Present 58:
Reading Further
I
I
!
Rachel Carson talked directly to the American people. "We still haven't become mature enough to think of ourselves as only a tiny part of a vast and incredible universe," she cautioned.
I ! ii
Questions for the Future
Protecting the Earth? Essential. Feeding the people who live here? Also essential. How to do both at the same time is a harder question to answer. Since the 1960s, this challenge has perplexed both the world's most dedicated environmentalists and its best agricultural scientists.
Can a book change the world? Rachel Carson did not dare hope that it could. But she wrote Silent Spring anyway and crossed her fingers. The book, published in 1962, alerted Americans to the dangers of pesticides. Carson argued that the chemical industry, in their eagerness to stop insects from destroying crops, had exposed plants, animals, and people to poisons. The effects, she warned, would be disastrous.
Carson was a scientist and writer who loved nature. At a time when few women had careers outside the home, Carson earned an advanced degree in marine biology. She went on to write popular books about science.
But Silent Spring was unique. In it, Carson criticized the big chemical companies that made pesticides. She also criticized the farmers who used them profusely, as well as the politicians who approved their use to clear public places of bugs. She suggested that by trying to control nature, people risked their own survival.
Carson feared that her position would be very unpopular. In the early 1960s, many Americans put great faith in science. They were likely to accept that whatever scientists thought was a good idea was, in fact, a good idea. Few people thought about protecting the natural environment.
Nonetheless, Silent Spring made a huge splash. A lot of Americans were ready for its message, no matter how disturbing it was. The book was a best seller. In just a few months, it had sold 100,000 copies. After its publication, many states introduced bills to regulate pesticides.
Positive reaction to the book was matched by negative reaction, however. Some scientists criticized Carson’s lack of objectivity. Many said that chemicals were completely safe and posed no health risks. Some critics even attacked Carson personally and called her a fanatic.
Perhaps Carson s most famous critic was Norman Borlaug. Borlaug, too, was a scientist. He devoted his life to developing crops that could produce more food for people. His plants needed pesticides, but they yielded much more produce than ordinary plants. Borlaug charged that Carson was one of “the people who do not want to eradicate [eliminate] hunger.”
For the past 50 years, tensions have simmered between environmentalists like Carson and agricultural scientists like Borlaug. They continue today.
584 Chapter 29
Before Silent Spring
Rachel Carson was not the first American to worry about the natural environment. Conservation efforts preceded her by decades. Long before Silent Spring, some Americans—even a president—began protecting nature.
Concern about the environment took root as American industry took root. After the Civil War, industrialization began to create the modern world. Factories made products for people to buy. Cities grew. Streetcars, subways, running water—they all got their start as the 19th century ended and the 20th century began.
Progress came at a price, however.
Factories put smoke into the air and waste into the water. Cities spread over wilderness or were created on new land that had once been swamps. The need for fresh water sometimes led to drastic action. When Chicago’s waste threatened the water supply, for example, engineers reversed the flow of the Chicago River.
These changes alarmed some Americans. They feared that nature would be destroyed if development continued unchecked. President Theodore Roosevelt, a nature lover himself, listened to the fears and took action. In 1905, he created the U.S. Forest Service. The agency set aside large tracts of forest that could not be logged. In addition, a system of national parks gave Americans places to go where they could enjoy nature.
But American industry continued to grow. During and after World War II, the United States led the world in car manufacturing. It took the lead in chemistry and medical research, too.
It seemed like Americans could do just about anything.
That was the context in which Rachel Carson wrote and published Silent Spring. It is not surprising that the book stirred so much controversy.
Many Americans wanted to believe that progress could continue without any negative effects. Silent Spring said that simply was not true.
In areas like Silicon Valley in California, cornfields (top) have been replaced by busy industrial centers (bottom). Environmentalists like Rachel Carson worried that people did nottake into account the ways that growth affects the natural world.
Linking Past to Present 58^
Researchers came from around the world to study with Norman Borlaug (left front). In this experimental wheat field in Mexico, he spoke about advanced growing techniques. "The three major inputs for raising wheat yields," one farmer said, "are farmers, improved seed and Borlaug."
i ne ureen revolution Feeds the World
When Rachel Carson began speaking out for nature, Norman Borlaug had already spent nearly two decades looking for ways to feed the hungry. He called Carson an “evil force.” He believed that she would rather protect nature than make sure people had enough to eat.
Borlaug spent his whole life developing high-yield crops. High-yield refers to crops that are designed to produce more on less land than ordinary crops. In the 1940s, Borlaug learned about a type of high-yield wheat, called
dwarf wheat. Dwarf wheat produced more edible grain than other types of wheat. It was also easier to harvest. Borlaug crossed it with a strain of wheat that resists harmful fungus. Borlaug’s dwarf wheat was a high-yield crop that changed the world.
In addition to contributing to the science of ending hunger, Borlaug contributed to the politics. He used his status to encourage governments around the world to use high-yield farming techniques. The effects of his work are impressive. In 1950, the world produced 692 million tons of grain on 1.7 billion acres of land. In 1992, 1.9 billion tons of grain were grown on 1.73 billion acres. That means that with a little more than 1 percent more land, production increased 170 percent.
For his efforts, Borlaug is known as the father of the Green Revo-ution. In 1970, he won the Nobel Peace Prize for his work. Borlaug ai1 km SUPPorters sa*d that the Green Revolution prevented as many as a billion people from starving. Some people have said that Borlaug saved more lives than any other person who has ever lived."
or aug scorned environmentalists. How could they, he wondered, igh yield crops to countries where people were starving? Environmentalists angered him. He said,
/ y lived just one month amid the misery of the developing j f aSJ ^ave for fifty years> they'd be crying out for tractors
tz ^zer and irrigation canals and be outraged that [people] back home trying dmy them
Borlaug believed that the effects of pesticides and chemical fertilizers were minimal. His choice was clear: feed the hungry.
586 Chapter 29
An Ongoing Debate
Now, decades into the Green Revolution, people around the world must wrestle with the same question that haunted Norman Borlaug and Rachel Carson. How can we feed a growing population and at the same time take care of a fragile Earth?
The people who grow food think about this question. Some of them work for agribusiness companies. These companies are large-scale farming outfits. They use pesticides and chemical fertilizers to increase production. Agribusiness leaders say that using less land to produce more will protect forests that would otherwise be cut down to make farmland. They also say their crops are necessary to feed the world’s growing population.
Other food growers think about the question differently and support organic farming. Organic farmers use only natural materials to grow crops—no pesticides and no chemical fertilizers. Organic farmers say that high-yield crops are not sustainable. They pollute the land and the water, and they threaten world water supplies. Growing high-yield crops, they say, may make it impossible for future generations to continue farming the land. Organic farmers say their techniques can provide enough food for the people on Earth today—and those who will be here in the future.
But it is not just food growers who need to think about the problems of farming techniques. Everyone who eats—and that means all of us—needs to think about it, too. We address the question of balancing environmental well-being and feeding the world by deciding what kind of food to buy. More and more Americans are choosing locally grown, organic products. Still, most Americans buy food grown with
Across the United States, farmers' mar kets make farm-fresh food available in cities. Here, First Lady Michelle Obama and a White House chef shop at a new farmers' market in Washington, D.C.
high-yield techniques.
Those of us who live in the United States have the luxury of thinking about how to balance our concern with the environment and our concern with humankind. In other parts of the world, where hunger is a daily problem, it is a question of life and death. People need solutions, and they need them now.
Hunger is not going away. Neither is the need for a healthy Earth. The problem of how to feed people and care for the planet is a problem today and will be one in the future. What is the answer? That remains to be seen. As you get older, you will join in the debates or you may have already. Perhaps, one day, you will be part of the solution.
Linking Past to Present 58'
Unit 9 Timeline Challenge
A Modern Nation Emerges
1867
U.S. Purchase of Alaska
Many Americans originally thought of this acquisition as a "folly," but the nation soon discovered a wealth of resources in Alaska.
1890
Congress Creates Yosemite National Park
The preservation of Yosemite in California is one of the first major victories in a national conservation movement to protect the American wilderness for future generations.

1898
Spanish-American War
The United States enters a four-month-long war with Spain. After a U.S. victory, Cuba declares independence from Spain, and Puerto Rico and the Philippines come under U.S. rule. A revolt against the United States in the Philippines lasts three more years. The Philippines become independent in 1946.
1870s
The Grange Promotes the Farmers' Cause
This self-help organization for farmers becomes a major force in politics and reform during the 1870s.
i
i
i
1898
U.S. Annexation of Hawaii
After years of debate, the United States makes Hawaii a territory with the support of President McKinley. Queen Liliuokalani is the last Hawaiian monarch to rule the islands.
1901
Andrew Carnegie Becomes Philanthropist
Andrew Carnegie sells his steel company for $250 million and retires to a life of philanthropy. He and other industrialists, like John D. Rockefeller, use their fortunes to build universities, hospitals, libraries, and concert halls to benefit the American people.
1909
Child Labor Draws to a Close
By year's end, 43 of the nation's 46 states outlaw child labor.
1911
U.S. Government Breaks Up Standard Oil
President Roosevelt has John D. Rockefeller and his company investigated for unfair practices. The company's monopoly of the oil industry ends, and many other companies' monopolies over other industries are investigated.
1920
Nineteenth Amendment Ratified
Ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment grants women the right to vote.
1895
1900

1905
1910
1915
\1920
1903
United States Takes Over Canal Zone
Panama cedes a 10-mile-wide "canal zone" to the United States. During the next two decades, the United States oversees the construction of the Panama Canal, which opens in 1921.
1909
Founding of the NAACP
W. E. B. Du Bois and other civil rights activists found the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People to ensure equal rights and opportunity for all African Americans.
1917
United States Enters World War I
U.S. forces side with and ultimately bring victory for the Allied powers. Three years later, the U.S. Senate tries to avoid involvement in future wars by rejecting the Treaty of Versailles, pushing the nation once again toward isolationism.
Modern Nation Emerge;
590 