Tip: You can put lengths of time in chronological order. People's life spans or important eras of time can be placed in the order | of the first date and with the I spans of time overlapping on a I time line. 50 CHAPTER 5
From Chapter 5, p. 161
You Try It!
Read the following passage and answer the questions that follow.
Farmers Rebel
In August 1786, farmers in three western counties began a revolt. Bands of angry citizens closed down courts in western Massachusetts. ... In September a poor farmer and Revolutionary War veteran, Daniel Shays, led hundreds of men in a forced shutdown of the Supreme Court in Springfield, Massachusetts. The state government ordered the farmers to stop the revolt under threat of capture and death....
Shays's forces were defeated by state troops in January 1787. By February many of the rebels were in prison. During their trials, 14 leaders were sentenced to death. However, the state soon freed most of the rebels, including Shays.
...............
After you have read the passage, answer the following questions.
1.	Which happened first—citizens closing courts in western Massachusetts or Shays shutting down the Supreme Court? How can you tell? If you don't know, ask your teacher or classmates.
2.	What happened after Shays's forces were defeated by state troops?
3.	Draw a sequence chain that shows the effects of Shays's Rebellion in the order they occurred. Then write a relative chronology of events.
4.	Read the chapter and create a sequence chain, an absolute chronology, a relative chronology, and a time line for each of the following topics: the Constitutional Convention, the time periods from Columbus to the ratification of the Constitution, and the people found in Chapter 5.
Chapter 5
Section 1
Magna Carta (p. 152)
constitution (p. 153)
Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom (p. 153)
suffrage (p. 153)
Articles of Confederation (p. 154) ratification (p. 154)
Land Ordinance of 1785 Ip. 155) Northwest Ordinance of 1787 (p. 155) Northwest Territory Ip. 155)
Section 2
tariffs (p. 159)
interstate commerce Ip. 160) inflation (p. 161) depression Ip. 161)
Daniel Shays (p. 161)
Shays's Rebellion Ip. 161)
Section 3
Constitutional Convention (p. 164) James Madison Ip. 164)
Virginia Plan Ip. 164)
New Jersey Plan (p. 165)
Great Compromise (p. 165) Three-Fifths Compromise (p. 166) popular sovereignty Ip. 167) legislative branch Ip. 167) executive branch (p. 167) judicial branch Ip. 167) checks and balances Ip. 167) federalism (p. 167) amendments, Ip. 168)
Section 4
Antifederalists Ip. 170)
George Mason (p. 170)
Federalists (p. 171)
Federalist Papers Ip. 171)
Bill of Rights Ip. 173)
Academic Vocabulary
In this chapter, you will learn the following academic word:
i Before you read Chapter 5, look for	advocate Ip. 171)
\ clues that signal the order in which | events occurred.
FORMING A GOVERNMENT 151
What You Will Learn...
The Articles ot Confederation
1. The'American people examined many ideas about government.
i
■&
2.	The Articles of Confederation laid the base for the first national government of the United States.
3.	The Confederation Congress established the Northwest Territory.

If YOU were there...
You live in a town in New England during the 1770s. In the town meeting, people are hotly debating about who will have the right to vote. Most think that only men who own property should be able to vote. Some think that all property owners—men and women— should have that right. A few others want all free men to have the vote. Now it is time for the meeting to decide.
How would you have voted on this issue?
[ TheBigldeaj
The Articles of Confederation < provided a framework for a J national government.
Key Terms and People
Magna Carta, p. 152
constitution, p. 153
Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom, p. 153
suffrage, p. 153
Articles of Confederation, p. 154 ratification, p. 154 Land Ordinance of 1785, p. 155 Northwest Ordinance of 1787, p. 155 Northwest Territory, p. 155
I BUILDING BACKGROUND
At the time of the Revolution, each I of the 13 states had its own government. The rights of citizens varied I from state to state. In their town meetings, people often argued about exactly what those rights ought to be. Solving such issues was one step in moving toward a national government.
hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the new American government.
Ideas about Government
The American colonies had taken a bold step in declaring their independence from Great Britain in July 1776. Their next political goal was to form a new government. To do so, the American people drew from a wide range of political ideas.
English Laws and the Enlightenment
One source of inspiration was the rule of law. This rule makes even government officials subject to law. England had limited the power of its kings and queens in two documents. These were Magna Carta and the English Bill of Rights. Magna Carta, a document signed by King John in 1215, made the king subject to law. The English Bill of rights, passed in 1689, declared the supremacy of Parliament. It kept the king or queen from changing laws without Parliament's consent. As a result, the people's representatives had a strong voice in England's government.
Many Americans were also influenced by the Enlightenment— a philosophical movement that emphasized the use of reason to
152 CHAPTER 5
examine old ideas and traditions. Philosopher John Locke believed that a social contract existed between political rulers and the people they ruled. Baron de Montesquieu argued that the only way to achieve liberty was through the separation of governmental powers.
American Models of Government
Americans had their own models of self-government to follow, like town meetings, the Virginia House of Burgesses, and the Mayflower Compact. In 1639 the people of Connecticut drew up the English colonies' first written constitution. A constitution is a set of basic principles and laws that states the powers and duties of the government. In addition, the Declaration of Independence clearly set forth the beliefs on which Americans thought government should be based.
To keep individual leaders from gaining too much power, the new state constitutions created limited governments, or governments in which all leaders have to obey the laws. Most state constitutions had rules to protect the rights of citizens or those accused of
crimes. Some banned slavery. The Massachusetts constitution of 1780 is the oldest state constitution still in effect.
Thomas Jefferson's ideas about religious freedom were included in the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom. This document declared that no person could be forced to attend a particular church or be required to pay for a church with tax money.
Right to Vote
Under British rule, only free, white men that owned land could vote. Many states' constitutions expanded suffrage, or the right to vote, by allowing any white man who paid taxes to vote. In every state, however, only land-owners could hold public office. Some states originally allowed women and free African Americans to vote, but these rights were soon taken away. Suffrage would not be restored to these groups for decades to come.
Comparing What two
principles were common to state constitutions written during the Revolutionary War?
READING CHECK .
Articles of Confederation
The Second Continental Congress was organized to create a national government. The Continental Congress appointed a Committee of Thirteen, with one member from each colony. This group was assigned to discuss and draft the Articles of Confederation, the new national constitution.
Under the Articles of Confederation, Congress would become the single branch of the national government, but it would have limited powers in order to protect the liberties of the people. Each state had one vote in the Congress. Congress could settle conflicts among the states, issue coins, borrow money, and make treaties with other countries and with Native Americans. Congress could also ask the states for money and soldiers. However, states had the power to refuse these requests. The government did not have a president or a national court system.
The Second Continental Congress passed the Articles of Confederation on November 15, 1777. Then it sent the Articles to each state legislature for ratification, or official approval, before the new national government could take effect.
Conflicts over claims to western lands slowed the process, but by 1779 every state except Maryland had ratified the Articles. Maryland's leaders refused to ratify until other states gave up their western land claims. Thomas Jefferson assured Maryland that western lands would be made into new states, rather than increasing territory for existing states. Satisfied with this condition, in March 1781 Maryland ratified the Articles. This put the first national government of the United States into effect.
Summarizing What were
two weaknesses of the new national government?
READING CHECK J
>4 CHAPTER 5
Northwest Territory
Congress had to decide what to do with the western lands now under its control and how to raise money to pay debts. It tried to solve both problems by selling the western lands. Congress passed the Land Ordinance of 1785, which set up a system for surveying and dividing western lands. The land was split into townships, which were 36 square miles divided into 36 lots of 640 acres each. One lot was reserved for a public school, and four lots were given to veterans. The remaining lots were sold to the public.
To form a political system for the region, Congress passed the Northwest Ordinance of 1787. The ordinance established the Northwest Territory, which included areas that are now in Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, Minnesota, and Wisconsin. The Northwest Ordinance created a system for bringing new states into the Union. Congress agreed that the Northwest Territory would be divided into several smaller territories with a governor appointed by Congress. When the
population of a territory reached 60,000, its settlers could draft their own constitution and ask to join the Union.
In addition, the law protected civil liberties and required that public education be provided. Finally, the ordinance stated that "there shall be neither slavery nor involuntary servitude [forced labor] in the... territory." This last condition banned slavery in the Territory and set the standard for future territories. The system of land allotment and political structures created by the two ordinances would become the typical method of organizing all new land added to the United States. However, slavery would continue to be a controversial issue.
Analyzing Information
How did the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 affect the United States?
I
Summary and Preview The new govem-I ment settled the future of the Northwest Territory. In the next section you will read about other challenges the United States faced.
Reading Check ,
THE IMPACT
TODAY
The surveying system created by the Northwest Ordinance still applies to public lands today, and even many existing private land boundaries are determined by these original measurements.
Section 1 Assessment
"j* hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify Wha't documents influenced ideas about government in the United States?
b.	Draw Conclusions What impact did the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom have on the U.S. government?
c.	Elaborate Why is the separation of government powers a requirement for a society to be free?
2.	a. Identify What was the Articles of Confederation?
b.	Summarize What powers were granted to Congress by the Articles of Confederation?
c.	Predict What are some possible problems that might result from the lack of a national court system?
3.	a. Identify Which states include land that was once part of the Northwest Territory?
b.	Describe How were public lands in the West divided by the Land Ordinance of 1785?
c.	Evaluate In your opinion, what was the most important element of the Northwest Ordinance of 1787? Why?
d. Elaborate What does the assignment of township lots reveal about values of Americans at this time? What precedents did the method set?
Critical Thinking
4. Categorizing Review your notes on the Articles of Confederation. Copy the chart below and use it to show the strengths and weaknesses of the new government.
Articles of Confederation
Strengths	Weaknesses
	
"’J'WriteSmart
5.	Thinking about the Articles of Confederation
Make a list of powers the Articles of Confederation gave the national government. Which ones seem strong? Can you think of any important powers that are missing?
FORMING A GOVERNMENT 155
History and Geography
Origins ««»
Constitution

lican »consent
‘Consti-jlesfrom
lies and from (testing document.
MAGNA CARTA, 1215
THE MAYFLOWER COMPACT, 1620
The Mayflower, shown here in an illustration, sailed to America in 1620. Aboard the ship, 41 men signed the Mayflower Compact, the first document in the colonies to establish guidelines for self-government. The signers agreed that they and their families would combine to form a "civil body politic," or community.
COLONIAL ASSEMBLIES



In this painting King John of England is signing Magna Carta, or the Great Charter, which established that the king was subject to the law just like everyone else.
It also declared that people could not be deprived of their lives, liberty, or property "except by the lawful judgment of [their] peers, or by the law of the land." Compare this language to that of the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution.
"No person shall be... deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law..."
—Fifth Amendment, U.S. Constitution
THE ENGLISH BILL OF RIGHTS, 1689
The British Parliament's two-chamber structure also influenced colonial governments. In Article I, Section 1, of the Constitution, the framers continued the practice of a two-chamber legislature.
"All legislative powers... shall be vested in a Congress of the United States, which shall consist of a Senate and House of Representatives."
I,
Section I, U.S. Constitution 

VIRGINIA STATUTE FOR RELIGIOUS FREEDOM, 1786

This painting shows King William and Queen Mary of England. Before taking the throne, William and Mary had to accept the English Bill of Rights. The English Bill of Rights took even more power away from the monarch than did Magna Carta. It also protected the rights of English citizens. These ideas would later influence the U.S.Constitution.
"Excessive bail ought not be required, nor excessive fines imposed; nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted." —English Bill of Bights
Classical liberal principles such as the written protection of citizens' personal liberties were reflected in the addition of the Bill of Rights. The First Amendment's freedom of religion clauses were based on Thomas Jefferson's Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom. The document, which was accepted by the Virginia legislature in 1786, ensured the separation of church and state in Virginia.
"Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof..." —First Amendment, U.S. Constitution

luaidiwi

DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE, 1776
The framers wrote the Constitution to help implement the ideals put forth in the Declaration of Independence. The grievances listed in the Declaration discussed the king's interference with representative government and the application of laws by judges and juries, the quartering of troops in colonists' homes, and the ignoring of petitions sent to the king that requested changes to British policies. The Constitution provided for a clear system of representation in government. The Bill of Rights addresses some of the grievances specifically: The Sixth Amendment requires criminal trials to have juries. The First Amendment guarantees the right of citizens to petition the governmer The Third Amendment restricts the government's ability to quarter troops in private homes.

4



ANALYSIS
SKILL analyzing information
Enlightenment thinkers such as English philosopher John Locke supported the movement toward self-government. Locke argued in his writings that government could exist only with "the consent of the governed. "The framers of the Constitution looked to Locke for inspiration when writing the Constitution, as you can see from its very first words.
"We the people of the United States... "
U.S.
Constitution *ork
fOtlN


1.	What documents did the framers look to when writing the Constitution?
2.	How did the English parliamentary system affect the kind of government the framers created?

s

SECTION
iliilWlilWi
2
TEKS 1A, 10A, IOC, 11A, 15A, 15B
What You Will Learn...
1.	The United States had difficulties with other nations.
2.	Internal economic problems plagued the new nation.
3.	Shays's Rebellion pointed out weaknesses in the Articles of Confederation.
4.	Many Americans called for changes in the national government.
The Neifl^ Mlation Faces CZhallencjes
If YOU were there...
You own an orchard in Maryland in the 1780s. When you sell apples and apple pies in the market, people pay you with paper money.
But now the tax collector says you must pay your taxes in gold or silver coins, not paper money. You and the other farmers are furious. Is this the liberty you fought a war for?
What would you do to protest these taxes?
Problems faced by the young nation made it clear that a new constitution was needed.
Key Terms and People
tariffs, p. 159
interstate commerce, p. 160 inflation, p. 161 depression, p. 161 Daniel Shays, p. 161 Shays's Rebellion, p. 161
hmhsocialstudies.com
L™2!!£JSSS5---------->
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the problems faced by the new nation.
I BUILDING BACKGROUND
Americans surprised the world by win- > I ning their independence from Great Britain. Butthe 13 new states were I far from being a strong nation. Internal problems, especially with taxes	j
! and the economy, led to protests and rebellion. The government also	’
had trouble with foreign trade and treaties.
---------------------------------------
Relations with Other Countries
Under the Articles of Confederation, Congress could not force states to provide soldiers for an army. The Continental Army had disbanded, or dissolved, soon after the signing of the Treaty of Paris of 1783. Without an army, the national government found it difficult to protect its citizens against foreign threats.
Trouble with Britain
It was also difficult to enforce international treaties such as the Treaty of Paris of 1783. The United States found it especially hard to force the British to turn over "with all convenient speed" their forts on the American side of the Great Lakes. The United States wanted to gain control of these forts because they protected valuable land and fur-trade routes. Still, Britain was slow to withdraw from the area. A British official warned against the United States trying to seize the forts by force. He said that any attempt to do so would be opposed by the thousands of British soldiers who had settled in Canada after the Revolution "who are ready to fly to arms at a moment's warning."
58 CHAPTER 5
Trade with Britain
The United States also faced problems trading with Great Britain. After the signing of the Treaty of Paris, Britain closed many of its ports to American ships. Before the Revolutionary War, colonial ships had traded a great deal with the British West Indies and stopped there on their way to other destinations. This travel and trading stopped after 1783.
In addition, Britain forced American merchants to pay high tariffs—taxes on imports or exports. The tariffs applied to goods such as rice, tobacco, tar, and oil that were grown or mined in the United States and then sold in Britain. Merchants had to raise prices to cover the tariffs. Ultimately, the costs would be passed on to customers, who had to pay higher prices for the goods. The economic condition of the country was getting worse by the day.
Trade with Spain
In 1784 Spanish officials closed the lower Mississippi River to U.S. shipping. Western farmers and merchants were furious because they used the Mississippi to send goods to eastern and foreign markets. Congress tried to work out an agreement with Spain, but the plan did not receive a majority vote in Congress. The plan could not be passed. As a result, Spain broke off the negotiations.
Many state leaders began to criticize the national government. Rhode Island's representatives wrote, "Our federal government is but a name; a mere shadow without substance [power]." Critics believed that Spain might have continued to negotiate if the United States had possessed a strong military. These leaders believed that the national government needed to be more powerful.
FORMING A GOVERNMENT 159
Impact of Closed Markets
The closing of markets in the British West Indies seriously affected the U.S. economy. James Madison of Virginia wrote about the crisis.
^The Revolution has robbed us of our trade withthe West Indies . . . without opening any other channels to compensate [make up for] it.
In every point of view, indeed, the trade of this country is in a deplorable [terrible] condition/^
—James Madison, quoted in Independence on Trial by Frederick W. Marks III
Farmers could no longer export their goods to the British West Indies. They also had to hire British ships to carry their goods to British markets, which was very expensive. American exports dropped while British goods flowed freely into the United States.
This unequal trade caused serious economic problems for the new nation. British merchants could sell manufactured products in the United States at much lower prices than locally made goods. This difference in prices hurt American businesses.
The Confederation Congress could not correct the problem because it did not have the authority either to pass tariffs or to order the states to pass tariffs. The states could offer little help. If one state passed a tariff, the British could simply sell their goods in another state. Most states did not cooperate in trade matters. Instead, states worked only to increase their own trade rather than working to improve the trade situation for the whole country.
In 1785 the situation led a British magazine to call the new nation the Dis-United States. As a result of the trade problems with Britain, American merchants began looking for other markets such as China, France, and the Netherlands. Despite such attempts, Britain remained the most important trading partner of the United States.
Reading Check
Analyzing Why was the Confederation Congress unable to solve America's international trade problems?
Economic Problems
In addition to international trade issues, other challenges soon appeared. Trade problems among the states, war debts, and a weak economy plagued the states.
Trade among States
Because the Confederation Congress had no power to regulate interstate commerce— trade between two or more states—states followed their own trade interests. As a result, trade laws differed from state to state. This situation made trade difficult for merchants whose businesses crossed state lines.
Inflation
After the Revolutionary War, most states had a hard time paying off war debts and struggled to collect overdue taxes. To ease this hardship, some states began printing large amounts of paper money. The result was inflation. This money had little
I A
Farmer Leads a Revolt H in the face of demands that he leave the court-	S|
S	ting down the courts, fanners hoped to stop the
^ governmetnt from selling their land. .
Whotwastheoirtco/neofShpys'sffebe/Kon?

»0 CHAPTER 5
or no real value, because states did not have gold or silver reserves to back it up. Inflation occurs when there are increased prices for goods and services combined with the reduced value of money. Congress had no power to stop states from issuing more paper money and thus stop inflation.
Weak Economy
In Rhode Island the state legislature printed large amounts of paper money worth very little. This made debtors—people who owe money—quite happy. They could pay back their debts with paper money worth less than the coins they had borrowed. However, creditors—people who lend money—were upset. Hundreds of creditors fled Rhode Island to avoid being paid back with worthless money.
The loss of trade with Britain combined with inflation created a depression. A depression is a period of low economic activity combined with a rise in unemployment.
Reading Check
Summarizing What economic problems did the new nation face?
Shays's Rebellion
Each state handled its economic problems differently. Massachusetts refused to print worthless paper money. It tried to pay its war debts by collecting taxes on land.
Heavy Debts for Farmers
Massachusetts's tax policy hit farmers hard. As landowners, they had to pay the new taxes. However, farmers had trouble paying their debts. The courts began forcing them to sell their property. Some farmers had to serve terms in debtors' prison; others had to sell their labor.
Many government leaders in the state did not care about the problems of poor farmers, however. In some cases, farmers actually owed these leaders money.
Farmers Rebel
In August 1786, farmers in three western counties began a revolt. Bands of angry citizens closed down courts in western Massachusetts. Their reasoning was simple—with the courts shut down, no one's property could be taken. In September a poor farmer and Revolutionary War veteran, Daniel Shays, led hundreds of men in a forced shutdown of the Supreme Court in Springfield, Massachusetts. The state government ordered the farmers to stop the revolt under threat of capture and death. These threats only made Sh< i £ nd his followers more determined. The of farmers to protest high taxes anc : debt became known as Shays's Rebellion. Shays's Defeat
Shays's forces were defeated by state troops in January 1787. By February many of the rebels were in prison. During their trials, 14 leaders were sentenced to death. However, the state soon freed most of the rebels, including Shays. State officials knew that many citizens of the state agreed with the rebels and their cause.
READING CHECK
Shays's
Rebellion
71 hmhsocialstudies.com
Finding Main Ideas
What led to Shays's Rebellion?
FORMING A GOVERNMENT 161
Calls for Change
Weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation
Most power held by states
One branch of government
delegates were late and missed the meeting. Connecticut, Georgia, Maryland, and South Carolina did not respond to the request at all and sent no delegates.
Because of the poor attendance, the participants, including James Madison and Alexander Hamilton, called on all 13 states to send delegates to a Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia in May 1787. They planned to revise the Articles of Confederation to better meet the needs of the nation. The failure of the Articles of Confederation led to the creation of the Constitution and began the period of the early republic. This period would last until 1800, when the political system we know today became more established.
Finding Main Ideas
Why did some people believe the national government needed to change?
In the end, Shays's Rebellion showed the weakness of the Confederation government. It led some Americans to admit that the Articles of Confederation had failed to protect the ideals of liberty set forth in the Declaration of Independence.
When Massachusetts had asked the national government to help put down Shays's Rebellion, Congress could offer little help. More Americans began calling for a stronger central government. They wanted leaders who

Legislative branch has few powers
No executive branch
No judicial system
No system of checks and balances
would be able to protect the nation in times of crisis.
Earlier in 1786 the Virginia legislature had called for a national conference. It wanted to talk about economic problems and ways to change the Articles of Confederation. The meeting took place in Annapolis, Maryland, in September 1786.
Nine states decided to send delegates to the Annapolis Convention but some of their
Reading Check .
I SUMMARY AND PREVIEW
Many Ameri-I cans believed that Shays's Rebellion was final proof that the national government needed to be changed. In the next section you will read about the Constitutional Convention.
Section 2 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
ONLINE QUIZ
| Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1. a. Summarize What problems did the United i States experience with Spain and Great Britain? i b. Predict What are some possible results of the t growing problems between the United States and [ Great Britain? Why was access to the Mississippi I	so important for Americans?
f 2. a. Describe What difficulties were involved with |	interstate commerce?
I b. Analyze What was the cause of inflation in the new nation, and how could it have been prevented?
3.	a. Explain How did Massachusetts's tax policy affect farmers?
b. Evaluate Defend the actions of Daniel Shays and the other rebels.
4.	a. Recall Why did Madison and Hamilton call for | a Constitutional Convention?
t b. Analyze How did Shays's Rebellion lead to a | call for change in the United States?
i
I 2 CHAPTER 5
c. Analyze Identify the causes of the creation of the early republic.
Critical Thinking
5. Categorizing Review your notes on the problems faced by the new nation. Then identify those problems as either domestic or international in a graphic organizer like the one shown below.
Domestic Problems	International Problems
	
	
wyWriteSmart
6. Identifying Problems In this section you learned about several problems of the young United States. Were any of those problems made worse by the powers that the Articles of Confederation did or did not give the national government?
Cir©at i ng th©
Constitution
SECTION
TEKS 1 A, 1C, 4D, 10C, 12B, 15B, 15C, 15D, 16A, 19A
If YOU were there...
You are a merchant in Connecticut in 1787. You have been a member of your state legislature for several years. This spring, the legislature is choosing delegates to a convention to revise the Articles of Confederation. Delegates will meet in Philadelphia. It means leaving your business in others' hands for most of the summer.
Still, you hope to be chosen.
Why would you want to go to the Constitutional Convention?
What You Will Learn..,
Main Ideas
Delegates to the Constitutional Convention met in Philadelphia's Indepen
BUILDING BACKGROUND
It did not take long for people 1 to realize that the Articles of Confederation had many | weaknesses. By the mid-1780s most political leaders agreed that changes were needed. To make those changes, they called on people with experience in government. Constitutional Convention
In February 1787 the Confederation Congress invited each state to send delegates to a convention in Philadelphia. The goal of the meeting was to improve the Articles of Confederation.
1.	The Constitutional Convention met to improve the government of the United States.
2.	The issue of representation led to the Great Compromise.
3.	Regional debate over slavery led to the Three-Fifths Compromise.
The U.S. Constitution created federalism and a balance of power.
The Big Idea
A new constitution provided a framework for a stronger national government.
Key Terms and People
Constitutional Convention, p. 164 James Madison, p. 164 Virginia Plan, p. 164 New Jersey Plan, p. 165 Great Compromise, p. 165 Three-Fifths Compromise, p. 166 popular sovereignty, p. 167 legislative branch, p. 167 executive branch, p. 167 judicial branch, p. 167 checks and balances, p. 167 federalism, p. 167 amendments, p. 168
i hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the principles supported by the Constitution.
163
Roger Sherman
James Madison
James Wilson
The Constitutional Convention was held in May 1787 in Philadelphia's Independence Hall to improve the Articles of Confederation. However, delegates would leave with an entirely new U.S. Constitution. This decision angered some of the participants.
Most delegates were well educated, and many had served in state legislatures or Congress. Benjamin Franklin and James Madison were there. Revolutionary War hero George Washington was elected president of the Convention.
Several important voices were absent. John Adams and Thomas Jefferson could not attend. Patrick Henry chose not to attend because he did not want a stronger central government. Women, African Americans, and Native Americans did not take part because they did not yet have the rights of citizens.
Summarizing What was the
purpose of the Constitutional Convention?
Reading Check ,
Great Compromise
Several issues divided the delegates to the Constitutional Convention. Some members wanted only small changes to the Articles of Confederation, while others wanted to rewrite the Articles completely.
Those delegates who wanted major changes to the Articles had different goals. For example, small and large states had different ideas about representation, economic concerns such as tariffs, and slavery. In addition, delegates disagreed over how strong to make the national government.
Virginia Plan
After the delegates had met for four days, Edmund Randolph of Virginia presented the Virginia Plan. He proposed a new federal constitution that would give sovereignty, or supreme power, to the central government. The legislature would be bicameral—made
4 CHAPTER 5
This painting shows the signing of the Constitution on September 17,1787, James Madison, number 4 on the diagram, became known as the "Father of the Constitution"for his ideas about government and his ability to lead the delegates to agreement. Which person did the artist choose to make the focus of this painting? Why do you think that is?
up of two houses, or groups of representatives—and chosen on the basis of state populations. Larger states would thus have more representatives than would smaller states. Delegates from the smaller states believed that it would give too much power to the larger states.
New Jersey Plan
The smaller states came up with a plan to stop the larger states from getting too much
power. New Jersey delegate William Paterson presented the small-state or New Jersey Plan, which called for a unicameral, or one-house, legislature. The plan gave each state an equal number of votes, and thus an equal voice, in the federal government. The plan gave the federal government the power to tax citizens in all states, and it allowed the government to regulate commerce.
Compromise Is Reached
After a month of debate, the delegates were unable to agree on how states should be represented. The convention reached a deadlock.
Finally, Roger Sherman of Connecticut proposed a compromise plan. The legislative branch would have two houses. Each state, regardless of its size, would have two representatives in the Senate, or upper house. This would give each state an equal voice, pleasing the smaller states. In the House of Representatives, or lower house, the number of representatives for each state would be determined by the state's population. This pleased the larger states. The agreement to create a two-house legislature became known as the Great Compromise. James Wilson, a great speaker, saw his dream of a strong national government come true.
reading Check
THE IMPACT
TODAY
All U.S. states but one modeled their legislative branches on the federal one, with a House of Representatives and a Senate. Nebraska has a unicameral legislature.
Contrasting How did the Virginia Plan and New Jersey Plan differ?
Virginia Plan
•	Bicameral legislature
•	Number of representatives based on state populations in lower house
•	Number of representatives equal from each state
in upper house
New Jersey Plan
•	Gave more power to national government
•	Bicameral legislature
•	Number in both houses based on population
•	Gave more power to state governments
•	Unicameral legislature
•	Number of representatives equal from each state
FORMING A GOVERNMENT 165
Primary Source j
mHMI
POINTS OF VIEW
Compromise and the Slave Trade
The issue of slavery highlighted the growing division between the North and the South. Gouverneur Morris of New York spoke with much emotion against the Three-Fifths Compromise. Also, the idea of banning the foreign slave trade prompted southerners such as John Rutledge of South Carolina to defend the practice.
//If the Convention thinks that North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia will ever agree to the plan [to prohibit the slave trade], unless their right to import slaves be untouched, the expectation is vain [useless]/^
—John Rutledge,
quoted in The Atlantic Monthly, February 1891, by Frank Gaylord Cook
//The admission of slaves into the Representation ... comes to this: that the inhabitant of [a state] who goes to the coast of Africa and ... tears away his fellow creatures from their dearest connections and damns them to the most cruel bondage [slavery], shall have more votes in a Government [established] for protection of the rights of mankind//
—Gouverneur Morris,
quoted in Founding the Republic, edited by John J. Patrick
Finding Main Ideas How did these two views of slavery differ?
Three-Fifths Compromise
The debate over representation also involved regional differences. Southern delegates wanted enslaved Africans to be counted as part of their state populations. This way they would have more representatives, and more power, in Congress. Northerners disagreed. They wanted the number of slaves to determine taxes but not representation.
To resolve this problem, some delegates thought of a compromise. They wanted to count three-fifths of the slaves in each state as part of that state's population to decide how many representatives a state would have. After much debate, the delegates voted to accept the proposal, called the Three-Fifths Compromise. Under this agreement only three-fifths of a state's slave population would count when determining representation.
Another major issue was the foreign slave trade. Some of the delegates believed slavery was wrong and wanted the federal government to ban the slave trade. Others said that the southern states' economies needed the slave trade. Many southern delegates said they would leave the Union if the Constitution immediately ended the slave trade. Also at issue was Congress's ability to tax imports and exports.
Worried delegates reached another compromise. The Commerce Compromises allowed Congress to levy tariffs on imports, but not exports, and allowed the importation of slaves until the end of 1807. The delegates omitted, or left out, the words slavery and slave in the Constitution. They referred instead to "free Persons" and "all other Persons."
Summarizing What compro-
mise was reached over the issue of the slave trade?
READING CHECK A
66 CHAPTER 5
A
New System of Government
Most of the delegates to the Convention wanted a stronger central government than the Articles of Confederation could provide. They believed it was necessary for the protection and administration of the group of states. But delegates also wanted to protect the individual rights that had been won in the Revolution. They wanted the new system of government to support the ideals stated in the Declaration of Independence.
The right of individual citizens to maintain the unalienable rights of "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness" was supported by the idea of popular sovereignty. This is the idea that political authority is in the hands of the people. In the new nation, people expressed this power through their votes. The power of the government is limited by the power of voters. In a republic, the government consists of people elected by voters to represent them. In this system, voters can limit the actions of government by removing representatives who do not truly work for the goals of voters.
Checks and Balances
The delegates also divided the roles of government into three branches: the legislative, the executive, and the judicial. The legislative branch is Congress. It is responsible for proposing and passing laws, which are also called legislation. It is made up of two houses, as created in the Great Compromise. Members of the Senate and members of the House of Representatives are elected through different systems, which helps balance the power among voters from different states. The executive branch includes the president and the departments that help run the government. The executive branch makes sure that laws are carried out. The judicial branch is made up of all of the national courts. This branch is responsible for interpreting laws, punishing criminals, and settling disputes between states.
The framers of the Constitution created a system of checks and balances, which keeps any single branch of government from becoming too powerful. For example, Congress has the power to pass bills into law. The president has the power to veto, or reject, laws that Congress passes. However, Congress can override the president's veto with a two-thirds majority vote. The Supreme Court has the power to review laws passed by Congress and strike down any law that violates the Constitution.
Federalism
Even though many of the delegates wanted a stronger central government, they did not want to destroy state governments. In order to balance the power between these two types of government, they created the system of federalism. Federalism is the sharing of power between a central government and the states that make up a nation. Under the previous confederal system, states were only loosely joined together.
Under the Constitution, each state must obey the authority of the federal, or national, government. States have control over government functions not specifically assigned to the federal government. This includes control of local government, education, the chartering of corporations, and the supervision of religious bodies. States also have the power to create and oversee civil and criminal laws. States must protect the welfare of their citizens.
Amending the Constitution
One of the most important decisions the framers made was to include a method for changing or adding to the Constitution. They wanted the government to be able to adapt as changes were needed. The process for amending the Constitution was made difficult, however, so that major changes to the government would require the support of a large majority of voters. Two-thirds of each house of Congress and three-fourths of
FORMING A GOVERNMENT 167
states must approve a change before it can take effect. Although many amendments, or changes to the Constitution, have been suggested, only twenty-seven have been approved. The purposes of these amendments have usually focused on protecting civil and voting rights, and on procedures for administering the government.
Even though the final draft of the Constitution was adopted by the Convention, many disagreements still existed among delegates. Debates continued around the power of state governments and the role of each branch. Almost as soon as the document was adopted, different interpretations of the language used began to appear. Some of the disagreements
READING CHECK .
I
Summary I tion balanc
affect the views of lawmakers even today, but the Constitution is still the guiding blueprint for the nation's government.
Explain How does the con-
stitutional system of government protect the rights of individuals?
AND PREVIEW
The Constitu-:d power among three branches of the federal government but was only written after many compromises. In the next section you will read about Antifederalist and Federalist views of the Constitution, and the struggle to get it approved by the states.
Section 3 Assessment

hmhsocialstudies.com

Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Recall Why did the Confederation Congress call for a Constitutional Convention?
b. Elaborate Why do you think it was important that most delegates had served in state legislatures?
2.	a. Identify What was the Great Compromise?
b. Draw Conclusions How did state issues lead to debate over structure of the central government?
3.	a. Explain What was the debate between North and South over counting slave populations?
b. Contrast How did delegates'views differ on the issue of the foreign slave trade?
4.	a. Recall Why did the framers of the Constitution create a system of checks and balances?
b. Evaluate Did the Constitution resolve the weaknesses in the Articles of Confederation? Explain your answer.
Critical Thinking
5.	Summarizing Copy the graphic organizer below and use it to analyze how the Constitution supports each of the following principles: limited government, republicanism, checks and balances, federalism, separation of powers, popular sovereignty, and individual rights.
6.	Thinking about the Constitution Look back through what you've just read and make a list of important features of the Constitution. Be sure to note important compromises.
'8 CHAPTER 5
BIOGRAPHY ,
KEY EVENTS
Benjamin Franklin
How did one man accomplish so much?
When did he live? 1706-1790
Where did he live? Benjamin Franklin was born in Boston but ran away to Philadelphia at age 17 and made it his home. He also crossed the Atlantic Ocean eight times and visited 10 countries.
What did he do? What didn't he do! He was a printer, publisher, creator of the first circulating library, the first president of the University of Pennsylvania, inventor, scientist, philosopher, musician, economist, and the first U.S. Postmaster General. In politics he was a leading revolutionary, signer of the Declaration of Independence, head of an antislavery organization, delegate to the Constitutional Convention, and diplomat.
why is he important? Benjamin Franklin, son of a candlemaker, became a celebrity in his own time, both in America and in Europe. Few people have mastered so many fields of knowledge and accomplished so much. He invented many useful objects, from bifocal glasses to the lightning rod. One of the oldest founding fathers, Franklin inspired younger revolutionaries such as Thomas Jefferson. Franklin believed strongly that people should volunteer and be active in public service.
Finding Main Ideas How did Benjamin Franklin's life reflect his belief in public service?
♦ 1729
Becomes owner and publisher of the Pennsylvania Gazette
41732-1758
Publishes Poor Richard: An Almanack
1752
Performs famous experiment using a kite to show that electricity exists in storm clouds
1775
Submits the Articles of Confederation
1779
Appointed minister to France
1782
Helps negotiate the Treaty of Paris with Britain
Poor Richard,
' ■ >A N ?	“~—
For the Year of Chrift
1 7 3
jeing the fecond after LEAP YEAR:
makes finee the Creation
Years

169
What You Will Learn...
Ratifying the Constitution
1.	Federalists and Antifederalists engaged in debate over the new Constitution.
2.	The Federalist Papers played an important role in the fight for ratification of the Constitution.
3.	Ten amendments were added to the Constitution to provide a Bill of Rights to protect citizens.
T
Americans carried on a vigorous debate before ratifying the Constitution.
Key Terms and People
Antifederalists, p. 170 George Mason, p. 170 Federalists, p. 171 Federalist Papers, p. 171 Bill of Rights, p. 173
hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the differing views of the U.S. Constitution.
If YOU were there...
You are a newspaper editor in Philadelphia. During colonial rule, officials sometimes closed down your newspaper because you had criticized the governor. Now you are one of many Americans who want to be sure the new Constitution will guarantee individual rights. You are writing an editorial in your paper explaining what you want.
What rights would you want the Constitution to protect?
I BUILDING BACKGROUND
The new Constitution did not make I everyone happy. Even its framers knew they had not made a perfect | document Many people were afraid a strong national government j would become as tyrannical as the British government had been. Before f approving the Constitution, they wanted to be sure that their rights i would be protected.
l_,

Federalists and Antifederalists
When the Constitution was made public, a huge debate began among many Americans. Antifederalists—people who opposed the Constitution—thought that the Constitutional Convention should not have created a new government. Others thought the Constitution gave too much power to the central government. Convention delegate George Mason became an Antifederalist for this reason. In a speech to a Virginia ratifying convention he stated, "This power is calculated to annihilate totally the state governments." For some Antifederalists, the main problem was that the Constitution did not have a section that guaranteed individual rights.
Many Antifederalists were small farmers and debtors. Some Patriots, including Samuel Adams and Patrick Henry, were also strong Antifederalists. At the Virginia ratifying convention, Henry spoke out against the lack of protection of individual freedoms. "The first thing I have at heart is American liberty," he said. "The second thing is American union." Antifederalists were

0 CHAPTER 5
Alexander Hamilton Federalist
Supported the Constitution as an excellent plan for government Defended his views in the Federalist Papers
George Mason Antifederalist
•	Opposed the Constitution
•	Believed the Constitution needed a section guaranteeing individual rights
challenged by those who believed that the United States needed a stronger central government.
Federalists, supporters of the Constitution, included James Madison, George Washington, Benjamin Franklin, and Alexander Hamilton. Most Federalists believed that the Constitution offered a good balance of power between various political views. Many Federalists were wealthy planters, farmers, and lawyers. However, others were workers and craftspeople.
Federalists and Antifederalists debated whether the new Constitution should be approved. They made speeches and printed pamphlets advocating their views. Mercy Otis Warren, an ardent Patriot during the war, wrote a pamphlet entitled Observations on the New Constitution, in which she criticized the lack of individual rights it provided. The Federalists had to convince people a change in the structure of government was needed. To do this, they had to overcome people's fears that the Constitution would make the government too powerful.
Reading Check .
Comparing and Contrasting
Explain the similarities and differences between the Antifederalists and the Federalists.
Federalist Papers
One of the most important defenses of the Constitution appeared in a series of essays that became known as the Federalist Papers. These essays supporting the Constitution were written anonymously under the name Publius. They were actually written by Hamilton, Madison, and Jay.
The authors of the Federalist Papers tried to reassure Americans that the new federal government would not overpower the states. In Federalist Paper No. 10, Madison argued that the diversity of the United States would prevent any single group from dominating the government.
The Federalist Papers were widely reprinted in newspapers around the country as the debate over the Constitution continued. Finally, they were collected and published in book form in 1788.
FOCUS ON
Reading Take notes on the chronological order of this section. Which was written first, the Federalist Papers or the Bill of Rights?
Academic
Vocabulary
advocate
to plead in favor of
FORMING A GOVERNMENT 171
Primary Source
HISTORIC DOCUMENT
Federalist Paper No. 10
In November 1787, Number 10 in the series called the Federalist Papers was written in support of the Constitution. In it, James Madison describes the way federalism will overcome disagreements within society.
Mk landed interest, a manufacturing interest, a mercantile [trading] interest, a moneyed interest, with many lesser interests, grow up of necessity in civilized nations, and divide them into different classes, actuated [moved] by different sentiments and views. The regulation of these various and interfering interests [opinions] forms the principal task of modern legislation, and involves the spirit of party and faction [group] in the necessary and ordinary operations of the government...
The federal Constitution forms a happy combination ... the great... interests being referred to the national [legislature]; the local and particular to the state legislatures ... The influence of factious leaders may kindle [start] a flame within their particular states, but will be unable to spread a general conflagration [large fire] through the other states/*
—James Madison, quoted in Living American Documents, edited by Isidore Starr, et al.
Madison believes that lawmakers are responsible for regulating the many competing concerns that make up society.
The federal government will handle issues affecting the nation as a whole; state and local governments will handle those concerning local issues.
ANALYSIS
SKILL? analyzing Primary sources
Why does Madison think federalism will prevent disagreement?
The Constitution needed only 9 states to pass it. However, to establish and preserve national unity, each state needed to ratify it. Every state except Rhode Island held special state conventions that gave citizens the chance to discuss and vote on the Constitution.
Paul Revere served on a committee supporting ratification. He wrote of the Constitution, "The proposed... government, is well calculated [planned] to secure the liberties, protect the property, and guard the rights of the citizens of America." Antifederalists also spoke out in state conventions, and wrote articles and pamphlets that became known as the Antifederalist Papers. In New York, one citizen said, "It appears that the government will fall into the hands of the few and the great."
On December 7, 1787, Delaware became the first state to ratify the Constitution. It went
into effect in June 1788 after New Hampshire became the ninth state to ratify it.
Political leaders across America knew the new government needed the support of the large states of Virginia and New York, where debate still raged. Finally, Madison and fellow Virginia Federalists convinced Virginia to ratify it in mid-1788. In New York, riots had occurred when the draft of the Constitution was made public. At the state convention in Poughkeepsie to discuss ratification, Hamilton argued convincingly against the Antifederalists led by DeWitt Clinton. When news arrived of Virginia's ratification, New York ratified it as well. Rhode Island was the last state to ratify the Constitution in May 1790.
READING CHECK
Drawing Conclusions
Why were Virginia and New York important to the ratification of the Constitution?
2 CHAPTER 5
Bill of Rights
Several states ratified the Constitution only after they were promised that a bill protecting individual rights would be added to it. Many Antifederalists did not think that the Constitution would protect personal freedoms.
Some Federalists said that the nation did not need a federal bill of rights because the Constitution itself was a bill of rights. It was, they argued, written to protect the liberty of all U.S. citizens.
James Madison wanted to make a bill of rights one of the new government's first priorities. In Congress's first session, Madison _ encouraged the legislators to put together a bill of rights. The rights would then be added to the Constitution as amendments, or official changes. In Article V of the Constitution, the founders had provided a way to change the document when necessary in order to reflect the will of the people. The process requires that proposed amendments must be approved by a two-thirds majority of both houses of Congress and then ratified by three-fourths of the states before taking effect.
Legislators took ideas from the state ratifying conventions, the Virginia Declaration of Rights, the English Bill of Rights, and the Declaration of Independence to make sure that the abuses listed in the Declaration of Independence would be illegal under the new government. In September 1789 Congress proposed 12 amendments and sent them to the states for ratification. By December 1791 the states had ratified the Bill of Rights—10 of the proposed amendments intended to protect citizens' rights.
These 10 amendments set a clear example of how to amend the Constitution to fit the needs of a changing nation. The flexibility of the U.S. Constitution has allowed it to survive for more than 200 years.
READING CHECK
THE IMPACT
TODAY
Summarizing Why is being able to amend the Constitution important?
I
Summary I ments ove
AND PREVIEW
Early disagree-r individual rights resulted in the Bill of Rights. In the next chapter you will learn about the structure of the Constitution. In 1789, Madison suggested an amendment limiting Congress's power over its own salary. Although Congress proposed the amendment in 1789, it was not ratified until 1992.
Section 4 Assessment
I hmhsocialstudies com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify Who were the Federalists and the Antifederalists?
b. Draw Conclusions What arguments did the Federalists make for ratification of the Constitution? What was the main argument of the Antifederalists against the Constitution?
2.	a. Recall When did the Constitution go into effect?
b.	Draw Conclusions Why was it important that all 13 states ratify the Constitution?
c.	Elaborate Do you think that the Federalist Papers played an essential role in the ratification of the Constitution? Explain your answer.
3.	a. Recall Why did Congress add the Bill of Rights?
b.	Explain From where did legislators' ideas for the Bill of Rights come?
c.	Elaborate Do you think the process for amending the Constitution is too difficult? Explain your position.
Critical Thinking
4. Analyzing Review your notes on Federalist and Antifederalist views. Then identify the outcome of the debate in a graphic organizer like the one below. Be sure to mention the Bill of Rights.
5. Organizing Your Evidence In this section you learned how the Bill of Rights was an important addition to the Constitution. You now have all your evidence about the difference between the Articles of Confederation and the Constitution. Choose two or three of the most important points and prepare to defend the Constitution, just like Alexander Hamilton and James Madison did in the Federalist Papers.
FORMING A GOVERNMENT 173
Social Studies Skills
Analysis
1
Critical
Thinking
Civic
Participation
Study
Determining Different Points of View
Define the Skill
A point of view is a person's outlook or attitude. It is the way that he or she looks at a topic or thing. Each person's point of view is shaped by his or her background. Because people's backgrounds are different, their points of view are too. Since a person's point of view shapes his or her opinions, knowing that point of view helps you understand and evaluate those opinions. Being able to detect differences in point of view is important to understanding differences in people's opinions and actions in history.
Learn the Skill
When you encounter someone's beliefs, opinions, or actions in your study of history, use the following guidelines to determine his or her point of view.
1.	Look for information about the person's background.
2.	Ask yourself what factors in the person's background might have influenced his or her opinion or action concerning the topic or event.
3.	Be aware that sometimes the person's opinions or actions themselves will provide clues to his or her point of view.
Benjamin Lincoln led the troops that put down
Shays's Rebellion in Massachusetts. He was also a state politician and a general during the Revolution. Lincoln offered this explanation of Shays's uprising.
Among [the main causes] I rank the ease with which... credit was obtained... in the time of [the Revolution]... The moment the day arrived when all discovered that things were fast returning [to normal],... and that the
indolent [lazy persons] and improvident [unwise persons] would soon experience the evils of their idleness and sloth, many startled [panicked]... and... complained ... ofthe weight of public taxes... and at the cruelty of... creditors [those to whom money is owed] to call for their just dues [rightful payment]... The disaffected [unhappy people]... attempted... to stop the courts of law, and to suspend the operations of government. This they hoped to do until... an end should thereby be put to public and private debts/'
Lincoln's background as a general, state official, and leader against the rebels likely gave him a negative point of view on the revolt. His reference to the rebels as lazy and unwise also provides clues to his attitude. You should weigh such factors when evaluating the accuracy of his statement.
Practice the Skill
The following statement about Shays's Rebellion came from a Massachusetts farmer. Read it and apply the guidelines to answer the questions.
^1 have labored hard.. .all my days. I have been... obliged to do more than my part in the [Revolution], been loaded with... rates [taxes], ... have been... [abused] by sheriffs... and [debt] collectors... I have lost a great deal... [T]he great men are going to get all we have, and I think it is time for us to... put a stop to it."
1.	From what point of view is this person commenting on the revolt? What is his opinion of it?
2.	How does his view of himself differ from Lincoln's view of people like him?
3.	Is this view of the revolt likely to be more accurate than Lincoln's view? Why or why not?
I CHAPTER 5
Chapter Review
Visual Summary
Use the visual summary below to help you review the main ideas ofthe chapter.
Reviewing Vocabulary, Terms, and People
Match the numbered person or term with the correct lettered definition.
1.	Bill of Rights
2.	checks and balances
3.	constitution
4.	Constitutional Convention
5.	Federalist Papers
6.	inflation
7.	Northwest Territory
8.	George Mason
9.	tariffs
10.	Three-Fifths Compromise
a.	agreement that stated that each slave would be counted as three-fifths of a person when determining representation
b.	delegate to the Constitutional Convention who became an Antifederalist
c.	increased prices for goods and services combined with the reduced value of money
d.	area including present-day Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, Wisconsin, and part of Minnesota
e.	meetings held in Philadelphia at which delegates from the states attempted to improve the existing government
f.	series of essays in support of the Constitution
g.	set of basic principles that determines the powers and duties of a government
h.	system that prevents any branch of government from becoming too powerful
i.	taxes on imports or exports
j.	the first 10 amendments to the Constitution
FORMING A GOVERNMENT 175
Comprehension and
Critical Thinking
SECTION 1 (Pages 152-155)
11.	a. Describe What powers did the Articles of Confederation give the national government?
b.	Summarize What did the Confederation Congress do to strengthen the United States?
c.	Evaluate Which document or institution do you think had the greatest influence on the development of the United States? Why?
d.	Explain What policies and procedures did the Northwest Ordinance establish for future territories and states?
SECTION 2 (Pages 158-162)
12.	a. Recall What was Shays's Rebellion?
b.	Draw Conclusions What was the general attitude of foreign nations toward the new government of the United States? Why?
c.	Evaluate Of the problems experienced by the Confederation Congress, which do you think was the most harmful? Why?
SECTION 3 (Pages 163-168)
13.	a. Describe In what ways did the Constitution strengthen the central government?
b.	Explain How did the two compromises reached during the Constitutional Convention satisfy competing groups?
c.	Elaborate In your opinion were there any weaknesses in the Constitution? Explain.
d.	Summarize Explain the purposes and process for amending the Constitution.
SECTION 4 (Pages 170-173)
14.	a. Recall Why was the Bill of Rights added to the Constitution?
b.	Draw Conclusions Why were some Americans opposed to the Constitution?
c.	Evaluate Would you have supported the Federalists or the Antifederalists? Explain.
d.	Analyze Identify and explain the ideas of Federalists and Antifederalists using quotations from the writings and speeches of Hamilton, Madison, Jay, Henry, and Mason.
e.	Explain Summarize the rights protected by the Bill of Rights.
F6 CHAPTER 5
Reviewing Themes
15.	Politics Summarize the strengths and weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation. What political problems resulted from its weak government? How did the Constitution address these?
16.	Politics How did political disagreements lead to compromises in the creation of the Constitution?
17.	Politics What year was the Constitution created? When was it ratified?
18.	Politics How did the Constitution and the Bill of Rights address the grievances listed in the Declaration of Independence?
Reading Skills
Understanding Chronological Order Use the Reading Skills taught in this chapter to answer the question.
• "I til 'flu ef a W
The Federalist Papers are published The Constitution is ratified The Articles of Confederation are ratified Shays's Rebellion occurs
The Constitutional Convention meets in Philadelphia
tWMHMMWNMNMMMNMMIHBMINNIIMM*'
19.	Use absolute chronology to organize the events chronologically according to the chapter. Then write a paragraph that sequences the events using relative chronology.
Social Studies Skills
Determining Different Points of View Use the Social Studies Skills taught in this chapter to answer the question below.
20.	Describe the different opinions of the Federalists and the Antifederalists. Discuss how each side's viewpoint was influences by the historical context in which they lived.
myWriteSmart
21. Writing Your Editorial You should start your editorial with a strong statement of your opinion about the Constitution. End your editorial with a call to action: Ask delegates to ratify the Constitution. Remember that you are trying to persuade people to make a very important decision.
CHAPTER
Texas Test Practice
DIRECTIONS:
Read each question and write the letter of the best response. 1	Which term would best describe the newly independent nation in the 1780s?
A strong B united C troubled D confident
2	Under the Articles of Confederation, the greatest amount of power was in the hands of the
F
Congress. G
American people. H national government.
J states.
3	The structure of the U.S. Congress was created at the Constitutional Convention by the
A
Virginia Plan. B
Great Compromise. C
New Jersey Plan. D
Three-Fifths Compromise. 4	The nation’s most widespread problems under the Articles of Confederation involved
F trade.
G suffrage.
H slavery.
J rebellion.
5	The main objective of the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 was to
A establish a national government with limited powers.
B create a system for bringing new states into the Union.
C settle border disputes between the United States and Canada.
D regulate interstate commerce and curb inflation.
6	Which of the following documents influenced the system of government established by the U.S. Constitution?
F
Bill of Rights G Mayflower Compact H Federalist Papers J Olive Branch Petition 7	Read the following passage from one of the Federalist Papers and use it to answer the question below.
Z/The powers delegated by the proposed Constitution to the federal government are few and defined. Those which are to remain in the State governments are numerous and . . . will extend to all objects which . . . concern the lives, liberties, and properties of the people . . . The operations of the federal government will be most extensive and important in times of war and danger; those of the State governments in times of peace and security."
—James Madison, Federalist Paper No. 45
Document-Based Question What point was Madison making about the system of government created by the proposed U.S. Constitution?
FORMING A GOVERNMENT 177
CHAPTER	1787-Present
IQtlQ
"^WriteSmart
CITIZENSHIP /
GDq@ €®[(Qs20GqqG
Essential Question
How do the ideas in the Constitution affect the lives of Americans?
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS)
1A, 19C, 19D, 19E, 19F, 21B, 22A, 22B, 25C, 29A, 29B, 29E
SECTION 1: Understanding the Constitution...........182
The Big Idea The U.S. Constitution balances the powers of the federal government among the legislative, executive, and judicial branches.
THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES...............188
SECTION 2: The Bill of Rights ......................216
The Big Idea The Bill of Rights was added to the Constitution to define clearly the rights and freedoms of citizens.
SECTION 3: Rights and Responsibilities of Citizenship ......................................222
The Big Idea American citizenship involves great privileges and serious responsibilities.

i Pamphlet Everyone in the United States benefits from our
Constitution. However, many people don't know the Constitution as well as they should. In this chapter you will read about the Constitution and the rights and responsibilities it grants to citizens. Then you'll create a four-page pamphlet to share this information with your fellow citizens.
1954 In Brown v. Bo, Education, the Supremi declares segregation ir schools to be unconstit
Reading Social Studies
Economics
Geography
Politics
Society and Culture
Science and Technology
1
Focus on Themes In this chapter you will read about the three branches of government, the Bill of Rights, and the duties and responsibilities of a United States citizen. As you read about each of these topics, you will see the American
political system at work—not only in the Bill of Rights, but also through the responsibilities U.S. citizens have as they vote for leaders and work to help their communities and nation.
T
Summarizing Historical Texts
I
FOCUS on Reading History books are full of information.
Sometimes the sheer amount of information they contain can make
processing what you read difficult. In those cases, it may be helpful to
stop for a moment and summarize what you've read.
Writing a Summary A summary is a short restatement of the most	;
important ideas in a text. The example below shows three steps used in	-
writing a summary. First underline important details. Then write a short	'
summary of each paragraph. Finally, combine these paragraph summa-
ries into a short summary of the whole passage.
The Constitution
Article II, Section 1
1.	The executive Power shall be vested in a President of the United States of America.
He shall hold his Office during the Term of four Years, and, together with the Vice President, chosen for the same Term, be elected, as follows:
2.	Each State shall appoint, in such Manner as the Legislature thereof may direct, a Number of Electors, equal to the whole Number of Senators and Representatives to which the State may be entitled in the Congress; but no Senator or Representative, or Person holding an Office of Trust or Profit under the United States, shall be appointed an Elector.
Summary of Paragraph 1
The executive branch is headed by a president and vice president, each elected for four-year terms.
Summary of Paragraph 2
The electors who choose the president and vice president are appointed. Each state has the same number of electors as it has members of Congress.
T"T
Combined Summary
The president and vice president who run the executive branch are elected every four years by state-appointed electors.
