34 CHAPTER 2
World
1416
Prince Henry the Navigator establishes a center for naval exploration at Sagres, Portugal.
/J
The Arrival of the HISTORY Spanish
71 hmhsocialstudies.com
VIDEO

att***-
V	'
y	I g ,1
The ships of explorer Christopher Qolumbus sail again in the form of these replicas.	.*-»*

1492
Christopher Columbus lands in the Bahamas.
1609
Henry Hudson^ makes his first voyage to North America.
		■Mt 1600
SJIII	1533	
	Francisco Pizarro	
	and his men kill Inca leader Atahualpa.	
1609
Galileo Galilei becomes the first person to use a telescope to view the heavens.
1619
The first Africans in North America arrive at Jamestown, Virginia.
1644
The Qing dynasty begins in China and rules until 1912.
NEW EMPIRES IN THE AMERICAS 35
Reading Social Studies
Economics
Geography
Politics
Society and Culture
Science and Technology
Focus on Themes In this chapter you will read about European exploration of the sea and of North and South America. As you read, you will learn about how politics encouraged the desire to explore new trade routes and lands. You will also read about how
geography affected the race for empires in the New World. European nations began exploring the newly discovered continents in an effort to establish colonies.
Outlining and History
FOCUS on Reading How can you make sense of all the facts and ideas in a chapter? One way is to take notes in the form of an outline.
Outlining a Chapter Here is an example of a partial outline for Section 4 of this chapter. Compare the outline to the information on pages 52-57. Notice how the writer looked at the headings in the chapter to determine the main and supporting ideas.
The writer picked up the first heading in the section (p. 52) as the first main idea. She identified it with Roman numeral I.
Section 4: The Race for Empires
The writer identified three facts that supported III.B. She listed them as numbers 1,
2, and 3.
I.
Events in Europe A.
The Protestant Reformation B.
Spain and England Co to War 1.	Sea dogs
2.	Spanish Armada
II.
Search for a Northwest Passage III.
European Presence in North America A.
English Presence in the New World B.
French Presence in the New World 1.	Huguenots
2.	Canada
3.	Explorers
a.	Cartier
b.	Champlain
c.	Jolliet and Marquette
d.	La Salle
C.
Dutch Presence in the New World The writer saw two smaller headings under the bigger heading on pages 52-53 and listed them as A and B.
The writer decided it was important to note some individual facts under B.3. That's why she added points a. through d.
s
S
I
Outlining a Few Paragraphs When you need to outline only a few paragraphs, you can use the same outline form. Just look for the main idea of each paragraph and give each one a Roman numeral. Supporting ideas within the paragraph can be listed with A, B, and so forth. You can use Arabic numbers for specific details and facts.
6 CHAPTER 2
You Try It!
Read the following passage from this chapter. Then complete the activities below.
Conquest of the Aztec Empire
Moctezuma ruled the Aztec Empire, which was at the height of its power in the early chapter 2 1500s. Moctezuma's capital, Tenochtitlan, (p. 46) was built in the middle of Lake Texcoco, near the present-day site of Mexico City. Tenochtitlan was a large city with temples, a palace, and buildings that were built on an island in the middle of the lake. The buildings and riches of the city impressed the Spaniards.
They saw the Aztec Empire as a good source of gold and silver. They also wanted to convert the Aztec to Christianity.
The Aztec had thousand of warriors. In contrast, Cortes had only 508 soldiers, about 100 sailors, 16 horses, and some guns. Cortes hoped that his superior weapons would bring him victory.
...................
After you read the passage, complete the following activities.
1.	Complete this outline based on the passage you just read.
I.
Moctezuma and the Aztec Empire were at the height of power in the 1500s. A.
Tenochtitlan was the capital 1. Built in Lake Texcoco 2.	Once you have completed the outline, organize the information into topics to research. Then write a question you want to answer about each topic.
3.	Interpret the information in your outline, list of topics, and list of questions to determine the main ideas that you would write into
Chapter 2 Section 1
Leif Eriksson (p. 38)
Henry the Navigator (p. 39) astrolabe Ip. 40) caravels Ip. 40)
Section 2
Christopher Columbus (p. 42) Line of Demarcation (p. 44) Treaty of Tordesillas Ip. 44) Ferdinand Magellan (p. 44) circumnavigate (p. 44) Columbian Exchange Ip. 45)
Section 3
conquistadors (p. 46)
Hernan Cortes (p. 46) Moctezuma II (p. 46)
Francisco Pizarro (p. 47) encomienda system (p. 50) plantations (p. 50)
Bartolome de Las Casas Ip. 51) Section 4
Protestant Reformation Ip. 53) Protestants (p. 53)
Spanish Armada (p. 53) Northwest Passage (p. 54) Jacques Cartier Ip. 54) charter (p. 54)
Section 5
immune (p. 58)
Middle Passage (p. 59) African Diaspora (p. 60)
Academic Vocabulary
Success in school is related to knowing academic vocabulary—the words that are frequently used in school assignments and discussions. In this chapter, you will learn the following academic words.
effect (p. 40)
structure Ip. 59)
an essay.
NEW EMPIRES IN THE AMERICAS 37
L
1.	Vikings were skilled sailors, and they were the first Europeans to reach North America.
2.	Prince Henry the Navigator established a school for sailors and provided financial support that enabled the Portuguese to start exploring the oceans.
3.	Portuguese sailors sailed around Africa and found a sea route to Asia.
Europeans Sat Sail
If YOU were there...
You are a sailor living in Portugal in the mid-1400s. Several of your friends are excited about joining an expedition to sail to new lands. Although Portuguese navigators have made improvements to sailing ships and advancements in ocean travel, you have heard about the dangers other sailors have faced on the open seas.
Will you join the expedition or stay behind? Why?
BUILDING BACKGROUND
Europeans were interested in the goods of Africa and Asia. In order to find new routes to these goods and to find new lands to settle, many European nations sent explorers on voyages. Europeans explored the world, searching for new lands and new trade routes.
\__________________________J
Key Terms and People
Leif Eriksson, p. 38 Henry the Navigator, p. 39 astrolabe, p. 40 caravels, p. 40
hmhsocialstudies.com

TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on Viking and Portuguese voyages of exploration.
Viking Sailors Reach North America
The Vikings were the first Europeans to make contact with North America. They came from Scandinavia, a peninsula that includes the present-day countries of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden. The Vikings were skilled sailors who developed a new style of ship, called the longship, that curved up at both ends. Viking vessels traveled the rough North Atlantic seas better than earlier ships because their designs were more stable.
The Vikings raided countries throughout Europe, but they also developed large trading networks. Viking ships sailed to the British Isles and the Mediterranean and Black seas. Eventually, the Vikings sailed west into the North Atlantic. There they founded a settlement on the island of Iceland in about 874. More than 100 years later, Viking Erik the Red left Iceland to settle Greenland.
Leif Eriksson, the son of Erik the Red, shared his father's love of adventure. In the year 1000, he was sailing from west Norway to Greenland when strong winds blew his ship off course and carried his ship all the way to the North American coast.
Eriksson and his crew landed on the Labrador Peninsula in present-day Canada. The Vikings then sailed farther south to the island of Newfoundland, and perhaps to what is now New England. According to their myths, Vikings saw forests, meadows, and rivers that held "larger salmon than they had ever seen."

38 CHAPTER 2
Eriksson settled in a coastal area he called Vinland, but the Vikings left after only a few years. Attacks by Native Americans posed a constant threat, and the area may have been too far from other Viking settlements to be supported.
After the Vikings left North America, Europeans did not return to the continent for centuries. In the 1400s, however, a growing interest in discovery and exploration spread across Europe.
READING CHECK
Sequencing List the stages of exploration that led to the Vikings' landing in North America.
Prince Henry the Navigator
In the early 1400s Portugal became a leader in world exploration. One man in particular, Prince Henry the Navigator, was responsible for advances that would make exploration more successful. Although he never set out on a voyage himself, Henry greatly advanced Portugal's exploration efforts.
In the early 1400s Prince Henry built an observatory and founded a school of navigation to teach better methods of sailing. He also financed research by mapmakers and shipbuilders. Finally, he paid for expeditions to explore the west coast of Africa.
Riches in Asia
During the 1400s, Europeans had several reasons to explore the world. First, they wanted Asian spices. They hoped to bypass the merchants who had a monopoly on, or economic control of, the Asian products that reached the Mediterranean. If a sea route to Asia could be found, countries could buy spices and other items directly.
Second, religion played a role in exploration. Christians in Europe wanted to convert more people to their faith. Third, many Europeans had become interested in Asian cultures. Explorer Marco Polo's book about his travels throughout Asia remained popular in Europe long after his death in 1324. Many Europeans wanted to learn more about Asia and its cultures.
History Close-up
NEW EMPIRES IN THE AMERICAS 39
^[flCK
Causes and Effects of the ™CTs Discovery of a Sea Route to Asia
Several factors led to the discovery of a sea route from Europe to Asia.
Financial backing from Prince Henry the Navigator New technology (caravel and mariner's astrolabe) Seeking trade with Asia and financial gain Converting people to Christianity
Curiosity
Effects
Discovery of a sea route to Asia Face-to-face contact with traders in distant lands
• Awareness of different cultures and ways of life
ANALYSIS
SKILL I
Analyzing Information Why was trade with Asia so important to Europeans?

Academic Vocabulary effect the result of an action or decision
FOCUS OH
Reaoiho Make an outline for the heading "A Sea Route to Asia." Technological Advances
New technology played a major role in advancing world exploration. Sailors began to use tools such as the magnetic compass and the astrolabe, a device that enabled navigators to learn their ship's location by charting the position of the stars. Better instruments made it possible for sailors to travel the open seas without landmarks to guide them.
The Portuguese also made advances in shipbuilding. They began designing ships that were smaller, lighter, and easier to steer than the heavy galleons they had used before. These new ships, called caravels (ker-uh-velz), used triangular sails that, unlike traditional square sails, allowed ships to sail against the wind. By placing rudders at the back of the ship, the Portuguese also improved the steering of ships.
READING CHECK .
Analyzing How did Henry the Navigator promote exploration?
A
Sea Route to Asia By the 1400s Portugal had several motives, financial support, and the technology necessary for exploration. Portuguese explorers set out to find new lands.
Rounding Africa
Even with new technology, travel on the open seas was dangerous and difficult. One person described the effect on sailors of a voyage south from Portugal.
Those which survived could hardly be recognized as human. They had lost flesh and hair, the nails had gone from hands and feet . . . They spoke of heat so incredible that it was a marvel that ships and crews were not burnt/,
-Sailor, quoted in World Civilizations, edited by Edward McNall Burns, et al.
In spite of the dangers, Portuguese explorers continued sailing south, setting up trading posts along the way.
In 1488 Portuguese navigator Bartolomeu Dias led an expedition from Portugal southward along the African coast. A storm blew his ships around the southern tip of Africa. This point became known as the Cape of Good Hope. Dias wanted to continue his voyage, but his men did not. Since supplies were very low, Dias decided to call off the voyage and return to Portugal.
Later, King Manuel of Portugal sent another explorer, Vasco da Gama, on an expedition around the Cape of Good Hope. Da Gama left Lisbon, Portugal, in July 1497 and arrived in southwestern India the next year. Portugal had won the European race for a sea route to Asia.
When da Gama reached the Indian port of Calicut, Muslim traders met him and his men. The Muslims surprised the sailors by speaking to them in Portuguese. Soon da Gama and his crew learned that the people of India had been trading with Muslim and Italian merchants who knew Portuguese. Da Gama made two more trips back to India. He even governed a small colony there.
40 CHAPTER 2
Results of Exploration
Portugal's explorations would have major results, including the start of the Atlantic slave trade. As Portuguese sailors explored the west coast of Africa, they negotiated for gold, ivory, and slaves. The slave trade devastated African communities. It led to increased warfare among kingdoms and broke up many families. The Portuguese sent many enslaved Africans to Europe and to islands in the Atlantic, where they lived and worked under brutal conditions.
The other nations of Europe watched as new trade routes brought increased wealth and power to Portugal. They soon launched voyages of exploration to find their own water routes to Asia.
Reading Check
Predicting How would continued exploration affect Africans?
I
Summary and Preview in the 1400s, I the Portuguese started a new era of exploration. In the next section you will learn how Europeans reached the American continents. Section 1 Assessment
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify Who was Leif Eriksson?
b.	Summarize How did the Vikings eventually establish Vinland?
c.	Draw Inferences Why do you think the Vikings did not try to colonize the Americas?
2.	a. Identify Who was Prince Henry the Navigator? b. Compare Why were caravels able to sail against the wind while other ships could not?
3.	a. Recall Who was the first explorer to find a sea route from Europe to Asia?
b.	Explain How did Muslims living in India learn Portuguese?
c.	Draw Conclusions How did the slave trade affect West Africa?
GEOGRAPHY
SKILLS: INTERPRETING MAPS
1.	Movement Which explorer was the first to reach the Cape of Good Hope?
2.	Human-Environment Interaction About how many miles was da Gama's 1497-1499 voyage?
hmhsocialstudies.com
Ww,1Wl,T,1flMI
Critical Thinking
4. Summarizing Review your notes on European exploration. Then copy the chart below and use it to explain the reason for the explorations, the technology that made explorations possible, and the results of the explorations.
5. Taking Notes on Early Explorers Review the section and make notes on groups of explorers. Make sure to list the differences and similarities between the groups, where they traveled, and why.
NEW EMPIRES IN THE AMERICAS 41
What You Will Learn...
Europeans Reach the Americas
1.	Christopher Columbus sailed across the Atlantic Ocean and reached a continent that was previously unknown to him.
2.	After Columbus's voyages, other explorers sailed to the Americas.
*------,---,---------------------'

Christopher Columbus's voyages led to new exchanges between Europe, Africa, and the Americas.
Key Terms and People
Christopher Columbus, p. 42 Line of Demarcation, p. 44 Treaty of Tordesillas, p. 44 Ferdinand Magellan, p. 44 circumnavigate, p. 44 Columbian Exchange, p. 45
hmhsocialstudies.com
f TAKING NOTES	!
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the explorers, their journeys, and the effects of European voyages to the Americas.
If YOU were there...
You are a European explorer who just returned to your homeland from the Americas. While you were gone, you tried new and different foods, including corn, potatoes, and cocoa. You have brought some of these foods back with you. You want your friends and family to sample these items, but they resist.
What will you say about these new foods?
IBUILDINGBACKGROUND
Europeans, Africans, and Asians I had traded with each other for centuries using land and sea routes. I
Native American groups also knew of each other through trade routes, i Although sailors often explored new areas, before 1492 the two worlds had no communication with each other.
 —
Columbus Sails across the Atlantic
Stories of fabulous kingdoms and wealth in Asia captured the imagination of Christopher Columbus, a sailor from Genoa, Italy. Columbus was convinced that he could reach Asia by sailing west across the Atlantic Ocean.
The Journey Begins
Columbus asked King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of Spain to pay for an expedition across the Atlantic. He promised them great riches, new territory, and Catholic converts. It took Columbus several years to convince the king and queen, but they finally agreed to help finance the journey. Ferdinand and Isabella ordered Columbus to bring back any items of value and to claim for Spain any lands he explored.
On August 3,1492, Columbus's three ships set sail. The Nina and the Pinta were caravels. Columbus sailed in the larger Santa Maria. The ships carried about 90 sailors and a year's worth of supplies. They made a stop in the Canary Islands, and then on September 6, they resumed their journey. Soon, they passed the limits of Columbus's
CHAPTER 2
2. Human-Environment Interaction Why do you think Columbus saw only the coastal area of Mesoamerica?
maps and sailed into uncharted seas. After more than a month with no sight of land, the crew grew restless.
Soon the crew saw signs of land—birds and floating tree branches. Columbus promised a reward "to him who first sang out that he saw land." On October 12,1492, a lookout cried, "Land! Land!" ending the long journey from the Canary Islands.
The ships landed on an island in the Bahamas. Columbus thought he had found a new route to Asia. Instead, he had reached another continent that was unknown to him. Columbus called the island San Salvador, which means "Holy Savior." Columbus also visited another island he called Hispaniola. There he met the Taino (TY-noh). At that time Europeans called Asia the Indies, so Columbus, believing he was in Asia, called these Native American people Indians.
The Taino lived in small farming communities. In his journal, Columbus wrote that the Taino were "so generous ... that no
one would believe it who has not seen it." However, Columbus and his crew were not interested in Taino culture, but in gold. After three months of exploring, looking for gold, and collecting exotic plants and animals, Columbus returned to Spain.
Columbus made three more journeys to the Americas during his lifetime. In 1504 he returned to Spain in poor health. Columbus died two years later, still believing that he had reached Asia.
Impact of Columbus's Voyages
The voyages of Columbus changed the way Europeans thought of the world and their place in it. A new era of interaction between Europe and the Americas had begun.
Columbus’s discovery also created conflict between European countries. Both Spain and Portugal wanted to add these lands to their growing empires. In 1493, Pope Alexander VI, originally from Spain, issued a decree that drew a new boundary for Spain and Portugal.
NEW EMPIRES IN THE AMERICAS 43
Primary Source
LETTER
Christopher Columbus, 1494
Two years after discovering the island of Hispaniola, Columbus wrote a letter to the Spanish king and queen outlining his ideas of its colonization.
Most High and Mighty Sovereigns,
In the first place, as regards the Island of Espanola: Inasmuch as the number of colonists who desire to go thither [there] amounts to two thousand, owing to the land being safer and better for farming and trading ...
1.	That in the said island there shall be founded three or four towns ...
2.	That for the better and more speedy colonization of the said island, no one shall have liberty to collect gold in it except those who have taken out colonists' papers ...
That each town shall have its alcalde [Mayor]...
That there shall be a church, and parish priests or friars to administer the sacraments, to perform divine worship, and for the conversion of the Indians.
-Christopher Columbus,
letter to the king and queen of Spain, 1494
ANALYSIS
SKILLS ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
What were Columbus's main concerns in founding a colony on Hispaniola?
This imaginary Line of Demarcation divided the Atlantic Ocean. Spain could claim all land west of the line.
The Portuguese king believed that this arrangement favored Spain. To prevent war, the leaders of the two nations signed the Treaty of Tordesillas, which moved the Line of Demarcation 800 miles further west. This gave Portugal more opportunity to claim lands unexplored by other Europeans.
READING CHECK .
Identifying Points of View
Why did Columbus want to sail across the Atlantic?
Other Explorers Sail to the 1 Americas
j Columbus's discoveries inspired others to sail i across the Atlantic Ocean. In 1501 explorer i Amerigo Vespucci (vuh-SPOO-chee) led a \ Spanish fleet to the coast of present-day j South America. He was convinced the land he reached was not Asia. Instead, Vespucci believed he had found a "new world." A Ger-; man mapmaker labeled the continents across the ocean America in honor of Vespucci. Europeans began using the names North America and South America for these lands.
In a Spanish settlement in present-day Panama, another explorer, Vasco Nunez de Balboa (NOON-yays day bahl-BOH-uh), heard stories from local Native Americans about another ocean farther west. Balboa set out to find it. For weeks he and his men struggled through thick jungle and deadly swamps. In 1513 they reached the top of a mountain. From this spot Balboa saw a great blue sea—the Pacific Ocean—stretching out before him.
In 1519, Ferdinand Magellan (muh-jEHL-uhn), a Portuguese navigator, set out with a Spanish fleet to sail down the east coast of South America. After sailing around the southern tip of the continent, Magellan continued into the Pacific even though his ships were dangerously low on food and fresh water.
Magellan's fleet sailed across the Pacific Ocean. In the Philippines, Magellan was killed in a battle with native peoples. Down to three ships, the expedition continued sailing west into the Indian Ocean. In 1522 the voyage's only remaining ship returned to Spain. Only 18 members of Magellan's original crew survived. These sailors were the first people to circumnavigate, or go all the way around, the globe. Their entire journey was some 40,000 miles long.
European explorers and settlers took plants and animals with them to the Americas. They also brought back a variety of new plants and animals to Europe, Asia, and Africa.
44 CHAPTER 2
This transfer became known as the Columbian Exchange because it started with Columbus's explorations. The Columbian Exchange dramatically changed the world.
European explorers found many plants in the Americas that were unknown to them, including corn, potatoes, tobacco, and cocoa. They brought these items to Europe, where they were highly valued. The explorers also introduced horses, cattle, and pigs to the Americas. Native Americans came to use these animals for food and transportation. They also started to farm European grains such as wheat and barley.
Without intending to do so, the explorers also introduced deadly new diseases to the Americas. Native Americans had no natural resistance to European diseases and often died as a result of their exposure to them.
Over time, a trading pattern involving the exchange of raw materials, manufactured products, and slaves developed among Europe, Africa, and the Americas. Europeans shipped millions of enslaved Africans to work in the colonies in the New World.
Evaluating What were the
negative aspects of the Columbian Exchange?
Reading Check .
The Columbian Exchange
Items brought from the Americas
Cocoa Corn Potatoes Squash Tobacco Turkeys
ANALYSIS
SKILL!
Analyzing Visuals Which side of the Atlantic did cattle come from? Potatoes? Sugarcane?
Items brought from Europe
Cattle	i
Citrus Fruits ■ Diseases	i
Grains Horses Sugarcane
I
Summary and Preview Columbus's I voyages to America inspired other Europeans to explore the "New World." This led to new exchanges between both sides of the Atlantic. In the next section you will learn about Spain's empire in the Americas.
Section 2 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
ONLINE quiz
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People 1. a. Recall What agreement did Christopher Colum-
bus make with Queen Isabella and King Ferdinand of Spain?
b.	Explain Where did Columbus think he had landed when he reached the Bahamas?
c.	Evaluate How did Columbus's voyage lead to a dispute between Spain and Portugal?
< 2. a. Identify Who was the first European explorer to see the Pacific Ocean?
b.	Summarize What route did Ferdinand Magellan's t ships take to circumnavigate the globe?
c.	Draw Conclusions How did the Columbian Exchange and the slave trade affect the economies and the people of Europe, Africa, and the Americas?
Critical Thinking	j
3. Supporting a Point of View Review your notes on i European exploration. Then copy the graphic orga-	j
nizer below and use it to rank, in order, the two most ? important results of European voyages to the Ameri- j cas. Explain your choices in the "Why" column.	I
4. Understanding Christopher Columbus Write j some notes about what life might have been like j for Columbus and his crew as they sailed across the ; Atlantic. Note ways in which their voyage changed ,i life for many Europeans.
NEW EMPIRES IN THE AMERICAS 45 !
TEKS 1A,2A
Spain Builds an
What You Will Learn...
If YOU were there...
1.	Spanish conquistadors conquered the Aztec and Inca empires.
2.	Spanish explorers traveled through the borderlands of New Spain, claiming more land.
3.	Spanish settlers treated Native Americans harshly, forcing them to work on plantations and in mines.
You are an Aztec warrior living in central Mexico in the 1500s. You are proud to serve your ruler, Moctezuma II. One day several hundred foreigners arrive on your shores. They are pale, bearded men, and they have strange animals and equipment.
From where do you think these strangers have come?
Spain established a large empire in the Americas.
BUILDING BACKGROUND
Spain sent many expeditions to the j Americas. Like explorers from other countries, Spanish explorers	!
claimed the land they found for their country. Much of this land was	;
; already filled with Native American communities, however.	j
Key Terms and People
conquistadors, p. 46 Hernan Cortes, p. 46 Moctezuma II, p. 46 Francisco Pizarro, p. 47 encomienda system, p. 50 plantations, p. 50 Bartolome de Las Casas, p. 51
hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on Spanish conquest and settlement in the Americas.
Spanish Conquistadors
The Spanish sent conquistadors (kahn-kees-tuh-DAWRS), soldiers who led military expeditions in the Americas. Conquistador Hernan Cortes left Cuba to sail to present-day Mexico in 1519. Cortes had heard of a wealthy land to the west ruled by a king named Moctezuma II (mawk-tay-soo-mah).
Conquest of the Aztec Empire
Moctezuma ruled the Aztec Empire, which was at the height of its power in the early 1500s. Moctezuma's capital, Tenochtitlan, was built in the middle of Lake Texcoco, near the present-day site of Mexico City. Tenochtitlan was a large city with temples, a palace, and buildings that were built on an island in the middle of the lake. The buildings and riches of the city impressed the Spaniards. They saw the Aztec Empire as a good source of gold and silver. They also wanted to convert the Aztec to Christianity.
The Aztec had thousands of warriors. In contrast, Cortes had only 508 soldiers, about 100 sailors, 16 horses, and some guns. Cortes hoped that his superior weapons would bring him victory. Cortes also sought help from enemies of the Aztec. An Indian woman named Malintzin (mah-LiNT-suhn) helped Cortes win allies.
■6 CHAPTER 2
At first Moctezuma believed Cortes to be a god and welcomed him. Cortes then took Moctezuma prisoner and seized control of Tenochtitlan. Eventually, Tenochtitlan was destroyed and Moctezuma was killed. Smallpox and other diseases brought by the Spanish quickened the fall of the Aztec Empire.
Conquest of the Inca Empire
Another conquistador, Francisco Pizarro (puh-ZAHR-oh), heard rumors of the Inca cities in the Andes of South America. The Inca ruled a large territory that stretched along the Pacific coast from present-day Chile to northern Ecuador.
Pizarro had fewer than 400 men in his army. But the Inca, like the Aztec, had no weapons to match the conquistadors' swords and guns. Though outnumbered, Pizarro's troops captured the great Inca capital at Cuzco in present-day Peru and killed the Inca leaders. By 1534 Pizarro and his Native American allies had conquered the entire Inca Empire.
In only a few years, the Spanish had conquered two great American empires. During the conquest, the Spanish and their
Linking
Armored Warfare
The armor of the Spanish conquistadors helped them defeat the Aztec and Inca. Spanish soldiers and their horses wore armor made of steel. The steel protected the soldiers from enemy weapons but was heavy and hard to wear. Armored weapons of today's soldiers include tanks and other large vehicles. Inside these vehicles, soldiers are safer from enemy gunfire.
allies killed thousands of Inca and Aztec and looted their settlements. Moreover, possibly more than three-quarters of the Aztec and Inca populations were killed by the diseases the Europeans brought.
Spanish Settlements
The Spanish began to settle their vast empire, which they called New Spain. Spain's government wanted to control migration to the Americas. Most of the emigrants were Spanish, though a few non-Spanish subjects of the king also migrated. Jews, Muslims, and non-Christians were forbidden to settle in New Spain. At first, most emigrants were men. The government then encouraged families to migrate. Eventually, women comprised one-quarter of the total emigration from Spain.
Spain ruled its large American empire through a system of royal officials. At the top was the Council of the Indies, formed in 1524 to govern the Americas from Spain. The Council appointed two viceroys, or royal governors. The Viceroyalty of Peru governed most of South America. The Viceroyalty of New Spain governed all Spanish territories in
I
i
NEW EMPIRES IN THE AMERICAS 47
Central America, Mexico, and the southern part of what is now the United States.
The Spanish established three kinds of settlements in New Spain. Pueblos served as trading posts and sometimes as centers of government. Priests started missions where they converted local Native Americans to Catholicism. The Spanish also built presidios, or military bases, to protect towns and missions.
To connect some of the scattered communities of New Spain, Spanish settlers built El Camino Real, or "the Royal Road." This network of roads ran for hundreds of miles, from Mexico City to Santa Fe. The roads later stretched to settlements in California.
Analyzing How did the Span-
ish conquer the great Aztec and Inca empires?
READING CHECK _
Reasons for Spanish f*ct$ Victory
Several advantages helped the Spanish defeat the Aztec and Inca.
Causes of the Aztec and Inca Defeat
Spanish steel armor and weapons Spanish horses European diseases
Spanish alliances with Aztec and Inca enemies
Effects
Reduced Native American population Spanish rule of the Americas Columbian Exchange
ANALYSIS
SKILL! ANALYZING INFORMATION

Which cause do you think was most important to the Spanish victory?

Exploring the Borderlands of New Spain
Spain's American empire was not limited to lands taken from the conquered Aztec and Inca empires. Many other Spanish explorers came to North America. They explored the borderlands of New Spain and claimed many new lands for the Spanish crown.
Exploring the Southeast
In 1508 explorer Juan Ponce de Leon landed on the Caribbean island of Puerto Rico. By 1511 he had conquered the island for Spain and founded the city of San Juan. De Leon also discovered gold on Puerto Rico. Spanish officials appointed him governor of the colony.
In 1512 Ponce de Leon discovered the coast of present-day Florida. The next year he searched Florida for a mythical Fountain of Youth. Though he never found the fabled fountain, Ponce de Leon acquired royal permission to colonize Florida. However, he failed to colonize the area.
Two decades later another explorer traveled through Florida. Royal officials gave Hernando de Soto permission to explore the coastal region of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1539 his expedition landed in an area near the present-day city of Tampa Bay, Florida.
De Soto then led his men north through what is now Georgia and the Carolinas. The expedition then turned west and crossed the Appalachian Mountains. De Soto discovered the Mississippi River in 1541. The explorers then traveled west into present-day Oklahoma. De Soto died in 1542 on this journey.
Exploring the Southwest
The Spanish also explored what is now the southwestern United States. In 1528 explorer Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca joined conquistador Panfilo de Narvaez on an expedition to North America. Their group of 300 men first landed on the Florida coast. They faced many severe problems, including a shortage of food.
CHAPTER 2
The group built boats, which made it possible for them to travel around the Florida panhandle. The explorers continued along the Gulf Coast and eventually reached the Mississippi River. Severe weather hit this group hard, and many members of the expedition died. Cabeza de Vaca's boat shipwrecked on what is now Galveston Island in Texas. Only four men survived: Cabeza de Vaca, a Moroccan-bom slave named Estevanico, his Spanish slaveholder, and one other sailor.
Each of the four survivors was captured and enslaved by Native American groups living in the area. After six years of captivity, the men finally escaped. They journeyed on foot throughout the North American Southwest, receiving help from Native Americans they met along the way. In 1536, after turning south, the group reached Spanish settlements in Mexico.
Soon after their journey ended, Estevani-co's slaveholder sold him to a Spanish viceroy. The viceroy assigned Estevanico to serve as a guide for a new expedition he was sending into the Southwest. Native Americans killed the enslaved African in 1539.
De Vaca eventually returned to Spain, where he called for better treatment of Native Americans. De Vaca later wrote about his experiences in the first European book exclusively devoted to North America. De Vaca's book increased Spanish interest in the New World. His writings fueled the rumors that riches could be found in North America.
For two thousand leagues did we travel, on land, and by sea in barges, besides ten months more after our rescue from captivity; untiringly did we walk across the land,... During all that time we crossed from one ocean to the other,... We heard that on the shores of the South there are pearls and great wealth, and that the richest and best is near there."
-Cabeza de Vaca, The Journey of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca
De Vaca's account inspired other explorers to travel to North America. In 1540 Francisco Vasquez de Coronado set out
Estevanico was an enslaved African who traveled with Cabeza de Vaca.
to explore the North American Southwest. He wanted to find the legendary Seven Cities of Gold that were rumored to exist there. His expedition went through present-day New Mexico and Arizona, where a group of his men discovered the Grand Canyon. Coronado trekked through Texas and
120A/V
GEOGRAPHY
SKILLS] INTERPRETING MAPS
1.	Location What was the capital of the Viceroyalty of Peru?
2.	Place Which viceroyalty included modern-day Mexico?
	Viceroyalty of New Spain Viceroyalty of Peru
	Capital of viceroyalty
0	1,000	2,000 Miles
0	1,000	2,000 Kilometers
	
100;W
THE IMPACT
TODAY
Today Christianity is the most commonly practiced religion in Latin America. The majority of Latin American Christians are Roman Catholics, but an increasing number have joined Protestant faiths.
through Texas and Oklahoma, going as far north as Kansas before turning around. He never found the fabled cities of gold.
READING CHECK
Comparing How were the expeditions of Ponce de Leon and Coronado similar?
Spanish Treatment of Native Americans
The journeys of the Spanish explorers allowed Spain to claim a huge empire in the Americas. Spain's American colonies helped
make the country very wealthy. From 1503 to 1660, Spanish fleets loaded with treasure carried 200 tons of gold and 18,600 tons of silver from the former Aztec and Inca empires to Spain. Mexico and Peru also grew food to help support Spain's growing empire. However, these gains came with a price for Native Americans. Native peoples suffered greatly at the hands of the Spanish.
Forced Labor
By 1650 the Spanish Empire in the Americas had grown to some 3 to 4 million people. Native Americans made up about 80 percent of the population. The rest were whites, Africans, and people of mixed racial background. Settlers who came from Spain were called peninsulares (pay-neen-soo-LAHR-ays) and usually held the highest government positions. To reward settlers for their service to the Crown, Spain established the encomienda (en-koh-mee-EN-duh) system. It gave settlers the right to tax local Native Americans or to make them work. In exchange, these settlers were supposed to protect the ’ Native American people and convert them to Christianity. Instead, most Spanish treated ’ the Native Americans as slaves. Native Americans were forced to work in terrible conditions. They faced cruelty and desperate situations on a daily basis.
The Spanish operated many plantations, large farms that grew just one kind of crop. Plantations throughout the Caribbean colonies made huge profits for their owners. It took many workers to run a plantation, however, so colonists forced thousands of Native Americans to work in the fields. Indians who were taken to work on haciendas, the vast Spanish estates in Central and South America, had to raise and herd livestock. Other Native Americans were forced to endure the backbreaking work of mining gold and silver. The forced labor and harsh treatment killed many native people in New Spain.


0 CHAPTER 2
The Role of the Catholic Church
The Catholic Church played a major role in the interactions of the Spanish with Native Americans. The Spanish king commanded priests to convert the local people to the Christian faith. Some Native Americans combined Spanish customs with their own. Others rejected Spanish ideas completely.
Some European settlers in the Americas protested the terrible treatment of Native Americans. A priest named Bartolome de Las Casas said that the Spanish should try to convert Native Americans to Christianity by showing them love, gentleness, and kindness. The Spanish monarchs agreed, but the colonists did not always follow their laws.
Reading Check
Finding Main Ideas How did
the encomienda system strengthen Spanish rule?
I
Summary and preview in the isoos I Spain built a vast empire in the Americas. The Spanish treated the Native Americans harshly in their new empire. In the next section you will learn about other European empires in the Americas.
Primary Source
BOOK
Brief Account of the
Devastation of the Indies
Bartolome de Las Casas, a Catholic priest in New Spain, encouraged better treatment of Native Americans.
//When they [Spaniards] have slain all those who fought for their lives or to escape the tortures they would have to endure, that is to say, when they have slain all the native rulers and young men (since the Spaniards usually spare only the women and children, who are subjected to the hardest and bitterest servitude [slavery] ever suffered by man or beast), they enslave any survivors. With these infernal [devilish] methods of tyranny they debase and weaken countless numbers of those pitiful Indian
nations.//
-Bartolome de Las Casas,
from Brief Account of the Devastation of the Indies
ANALYSIS
SKILL
Analyzing Points of View How did Las Casas's view of the treatment of Native American groups differ from the views of other Spaniards?
Section 3 Assessment
ti hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify Why did the Spanish begin exploring North America?
b.	Analyze How was Hernan Cortes able to conquer the Aztec Empire?
c.	Elaborate What advantages did the Spanish have over Native Americans? What role did disease play?
2.	a. Recall Which Spanish explorer received permission to colonize Florida?
b.	Analyze Why do you think Cabeza de Vaca wrote of great riches that could be found in the Americas?
c.	Evaluate Why do you think de Vaca called for better treatment of Native Americans after having been held prisoner by them?
3.	a. Identify What was the encomienda system? b. Analyze Why do you think the king of Spain commanded Catholic priests to teach Native Americans about Christianity?
Critical Thinking
4. Categorizing Review your notes on Spanish conquest and settlement in the Americas. Then copy the following graphic organizer and use it to explain the impact Spain had on the Americas.
Spanish America	
government	
religion	
labor	
'"VWriteSmart
5. Taking Notes on the Spanish Empire Take notes on the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire and the founding of the Spanish Empire. How did this empire affect Native Americans?
NEW EMPIRES IN THE AMERICAS 51
The Race for Empires
What You Will Learn...
J
If YOU were there...
1. Events in Europe affected settlement of North America.
2.	Several explorers searched for a Northwest Passage to the Pacific Ocean.
3.	European nations raced to establish empires in North America.
The people of your village in France have always belonged to the same church. Now in the 1600s, your village is divided over religious beliefs. You have heard about the Dutch colony of New Netherland in America, where people can practice any religion freely. You would like to leave for America, but your parents are unwilling to leave their home.
How would you persuade your family to emigrate?
Other European nations challenged Spain in the Americas.
Key Terms and People
Protestant Reformation, p. 53 Protestants, p. 53 Spanish Armada, p. 53 Northwest Passage, p. 54 Jacques Cartier, p. 54 charter, p. 54
BUILDING BACKGROUND
During the 1400s, the Catholic Church was one of the most powerful institutions in Europe. Not everyone agreed with all of its teachings, however. Disagreement, and sometimes violence, led some people to search for new places to settle. Events in Europe
hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the reasons for European voyages to North America, the search for a Northwest Passage, and the development of European empires in North America.
Many significant events took place in Europe in the 1500s. Disagreements about religion threw Europe into turmoil. Some of these disagreements eventually led to wars. At the same time, several European nations began to compete for land and power overseas.
Key Events in European History, *1450-1588

c. 1450
Johannes Gutenberg develops his movable-type printing press.
The Protestant Reformation
Spain and England Go to War
In 1517 a German priest named Martin Luther publicly criticized the Roman Catholic Church. Luther charged that the church was too wealthy and that it abused its power. Criticisms like Luther's started the Protestant Reformation. This religious movement began in small German towns but quickly spread to most of Europe. It became a part of many political disputes as well. The Protestants were reformers who protested some of the Catholic Church's practices. Many Protestants believed God meant for religion to be simple.
The printing press—a machine that produces printed copies using movable type— helped spread the ideas of the Reformation. Protestants printed large numbers of Bibles as well as short essays explaining their ideas. This let more people read and think about the Bible on their own, rather than relying solely on the teachings of a priest.
Conflicts between Catholics and Protestants took place throughout Europe, often leading to civil war. In the late 1500s French Catholics fought French Protestants, known as Huguenots (HYOO-guh-nahts). Many Huguenots eventually emigrated to the Americas in search of religious freedom.
In 1534 King Henry VIII founded the Church of England, or the Anglican Church. By making himself the head of the church, Henry challenged the authority of the pope and angered Catholics. Political issues soon became mixed with the religious struggles.
In the late 1500s King Philip II used Spain's great wealth to lead a Catholic Reformation against the Protestant movement. He hoped to drive the Protestants out of England. Standing in his way was the Protestant English queen Elizabeth I and her sea dogs. Sea dogs was the name given to English sailors who raided Spanish treasure ships. The most successful and daring was Sir Francis Drake.
Philip was angered by English piracy. He began gathering the Spanish Armada, a huge fleet of warships meant to end English plans. The Armada had about 130 ships and some 27,000 sailors and soldiers. This mighty fleet was launched to invade England and overthrow Queen Elizabeth and the Anglican Church. But in July 1588, the smaller, but faster, English fleet defeated the Armada in a huge battle.
The Armada's defeat shocked the Spanish. In addition to the naval defeat, Spain's economy was in trouble. The gold and silver that Spain received from the Americas caused high inflation. Inflation is a rise in the price of goods caused by an increase in the amount of money in use. Economic problems in Spain combined with the defeat of the Spanish Armada led countries such as England, France, and the Netherlands to challenge Spanish power overseas.
READING CHECK
Analyzing What led to the decline ofthe Spanish Empire?
Il
53
Search for a Northwest Passage
Europeans wanted to find a Northwest Passage, a water route through North America that would allow ships to sail from the Atlantic to the Pacific. The English began sending explorers to find it.
Italian sailor John Cabot knew that the king of England wanted to find such a route. Cabot offered to pay for his own expedition, asking only that the king of England grant him a royal charter to any lands he found. The king agreed, and Cabot made voyages to North America for England in 1497 and 1498.
Cabot sailed to North America, but he left very few records of his journeys. It is believed that he traveled along the coast of present-day Newfoundland in Canada. Although Cabot did not find a passage to the Pacific Ocean, his voyages were successful. They became the basis of England's claim to land in North America.
In 1524 France sent an Italian captain, Giovanni da Verrazano (vayr-raht-SAHN-oh), to seek a Northwest Passage. Verrazano sailed along the coast of North America from present-day North Carolina to Maine. Jacques Cartier (kahr-TYAY), a French sailor, led France's next major exploration of North America. He made two trips to what is now Canada. Cartier sailed into the Saint Lawrence River and traveled all the way to present-day Montreal, claiming the areas he explored for France.
The Dutch also entered the race. They hired English captain Henry Hudson to find a Northwest Passage. Hudson first sailed to present-day New York in 1609. The following year Hudson returned to North America, sailing under the English flag. He traveled far to the north. Eventually he reached a strait that he hoped would lead to the Pacific Ocean. Instead, it led into a huge bay, later named Hudson Bay.
None of these explorers ever found a Northwest Passage. Their explorations, however, led to increased European interest in North America.
Finding Main Ideas Why did
European explorers seek a Northwest Passage?
j READING CHECK
European Colonization
The Spanish and the Portuguese were the early leaders in overseas exploration. They dominated the beginning of the era of European colonization of the New World, which lasted from the 1500s through the 1700s. However, Spain and Portugal focused on Central America, the Caribbean, and South America. They left much of North America unexplored. The English, French, and Dutch explored and colonized North America, seeking to expand their colonial empires there.
English Colonies in the New World
The period of English colonization began in the late 1500s when England decided to set up a permanent settlement in North America. This colony was to establish an English presence in the New World. Sir Walter Raleigh received a charter, a document giving him permission to start a colony. In 1584 he sent an expedition that landed in present-day Virginia and North Carolina. Raleigh named the entire area Virginia.
The following year, Raleigh sent another group to found a colony on Roanoke Island, off the coast of North Carolina. The English colonists at Roanoke found life hard. They fought with Native Americans and had trouble finding and growing food. They did not have the wilderness survival skills needed to combat the new environment they faced. After only a year, the remaining colonists returned to England.
John White and 150 colonists resettled Roanoke in 1587. White's granddaughter, Virginia Dare, was the first English colonist born in North America. After a few months, White went back to England to get more supplies. War with Spain prevented White from returning for three years. When he came back, White found the colony deserted. The only clue he found to the fate of the colonists was the word Croatoan, the name of a nearby island, carved into a post. Did the colonists try to escape a Native American attack by fleeing to the island? White never found out. To this day, no one is certain what happened to the "lost colony" at Roanoke.
CHAPTER 2
1.	Movement According to the map, which explorers made two voyages to find a Northwest Passage?
2.	Place Which explorer started farthest south in searching for a Northwest Passage?
French Colonies in the New World
France built its first North American settlement in Florida, when Huguenots started a few small colonies there in 1564. The Spanish soon destroyed these settlements and drove out the French. Religious wars in France slowed further French efforts to colonize North America. When the fighting ended, the French renewed efforts to settle present-day eastern Canada. The explorations of Jacques Cartier and Samuel de Champlain gave France a claim to this region.
Nearly 70 years after Cartier sailed up the Saint Lawrence, French sailor Samuel de Champlain began exploring North America. He recorded his ideas about European exploration in his journal.
Through [exploration] we gain knowledge of different countries, regions and kingdoms; through it we attract and bring into our countries all kinds of riches; through it... Christianity [is spread] in all parts of the earth/'
-Samuel de Champlain, quoted in The Canadian Frontier, 1534-1760, by W. J. Eccles
Champlain followed Cartier's old paths. Over the years he made many journeys along
the Saint Lawrence River. He also visited the Great Lakes, led by Native American guides.
In 1608 Champlain founded a small colony named Quebec on the Saint Lawrence River. This trading post opened fur-trading routes for the French throughout the region. Champlain's explorations became the basis of France's claim to much of Canada.
In the late 1600s the French began spreading out from the Saint Lawrence River. Calling their North American territory New France, French fur traders, explorers, and missionaries were all on the move.
In the 1650s French missionaries told stories about "a beautiful river, large, broad, and deep." In 1673 explorer Louisjolliet (jahl-ee-ET) and missionary Jacques Marquette set out to find this great river, the Mississippi. (Hernando de Soto was the first European to find the Mississippi River, in 1541.) They reached the river and traveled down it as far as present-day Arkansas.
Nine years later Rene-Robert de La Salle followed the Mississippi River to the Gulf of Mexico. He claimed the Mississippi Valley for King Louis XIV of France. To honor the king, La Salle named the region Louisiana.
NEW EMPIRES IN THE AMERICAS 55

Starting in the 1700s, the French built new outposts. These included Detroit on the Great Lakes and Saint Louis and New Orleans along the Mississippi River. Most towns in the French territory were small. As late as 1688 there were only about 12,000 French settlers in New France. The French focused on trapping the wild animals they found instead of establishing agriculture. Beaver pelts used in hatmaking became especially profitable. New France's small population and the value of the fur trade led French settlers to ally and trade with local Native American groups.
Because of their close trading relationships, the French treated the Native Americans with more respect than some other European settlers had done. Many French settlers learned Native American languages, and they even adopted their ways of life.
Dutch Colonies in the New World
The English and the French were not the only European powers to seek colonial empires in North America. The Dutch, who had merchant fleets around the world, came in search of trade. They also exploited the fur resources in the area. They claimed the land between the Delaware and Hudson rivers and called it New Netherland. This area included parts of what are now New York, New Jersey, Connecticut,and Delaware. In 1624 the newly formed Dutch West India Company sent about 30 families to settle in New Netherland. Two years later Peter Minuit bought Manhattan Island from local Native Americans for about $24. Minuit then founded the town of New Amsterdam, now New York City. To attract colonists, the Dutch allowed members of all religions to settle in their colony.
Minuit also helped Swedish settlers found New Sweden along the Delaware River. The first settlement, Fort Christina, was begun in 1638. The Swedish settlement was small, but the Dutch felt that it threatened Dutch lands and fur trading. The two sides fought a series of battles. Finally, the governor of New Netherland, Peter Stuyvesant (STY-vi-suhnt),
conquered New Sweden in 1655. He allowed the Swedes to continue their colony, but he called it the "Swedish Nation."
Reading Check
Drawing Conclusions
Were the French explorers in North America successful? Explain.
I SUMMARY AND PREVIEW
The English, I French, Dutch, and Swedish explored the North American continent and later established colonies there. In the next section you will learn about the establishment of slavery in the Americas.
Section 4 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
"^WriteSmart
5. Learning about the French Empire and Other Settlements Take notes about the French, Dutch, Swedish, and English people who settled in America. Why did they come? What did they want and need in their new home?
NEW EMPIRES IN THE AMERICAS 57
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What was the Protestant Reformation?
b.	Explain What role did the printing press play in the Protestant Reformation?
c.	Summarize What were Martin Luther's reasons for protesting the Catholic Church?
2.	a. Identify Who was the first European to search for the Northwest Passage?
b. Describe Why did French and Dutch explorers try to find the Northwest Passage?
3.	a. Identify Identify the era of European colonization. What event began the period of English colonization? What happened to the first English settlements in North America?
b. Evaluate Describe the locations of European colonies in North America during the 17th century. Which do you think was most successful? Why?
Critical Thinking
4.	Sequencing Review your notes on the era of European colonization. Then create a time line like the one below and place the four events you think were most important to the development of European empires in North America on the time line. Be sure to include the date of the event, as well as a description of it and its significance.
What You Will Learn...
Beginnings of §lav©iry m th© Americas
1.	European diseases wiped out much of the Native American population, causing colonists to look for a new labor force.
2.	Europeans enslaved millions of Africans and sent them to work in their colonies.
3.	Slaves in the Americas created a distinct culture.
_______
If YOU were there...
You are an enslaved African living in North America. Your family is all that you have. You help each other, and your family provides some relief from the forced labor and harsh life on the plantation. Still, you long for your freedom. A fellow slave has told you of a plan to escape.
Will you stay with your family or try to flee?
Europeans forced millions of African slaves to work in their colonies.
Key Terms and People
immune, p. 58 Middle Passage, p. 59 African Diaspora, p. 60
I BUILDING BACKGROUND
European settlers in the Americas relied I on support from their home countries to establish trade and provide | protection. In return, the colonies were expected to produce money for the home country. Many colonies did this through plantations, mines, and other ventures that required a large labor force.
hmhsocialstudies.com
ITAKINCN0T6S	j
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the beginnings of slavery in the Americas.
The Need for a New Labor Force
European diseases had a devastating effect on the Native American population. Measles, smallpox, and typhus were common in Europe. As a result, most adult Europeans were immune, or had a natural resistance, to them. Native Americans, however, had never been exposed to such diseases and had no immunity to them. As a result, many Native Americans became terribly sick after their first encounters with Europeans. Millions of them died in the years after Columbus reached the New World.
No one knows exactly how many Native Americans died from European diseases, but the loss of life was staggering. Spanish author Fernandez de Oviedo reported in 1548 about the destruction of the Native Americans of Hispaniola. He reported that, of the estimated 1 million Indians who had lived on the island in 1492, "there are not now believed to be at the present time... five hundred persons [left]." In North America the Native American population north of Mexico was about 10 million when Columbus arrived. This

i8 CHAPTER 2
number would drop to less than a million. The drop in the native population played a major role in the emerging need for an alternative labor force.
Plantation agriculture was a mainstay of the colonial economic structure. Spain and Portugal established sugar plantations that relied on large numbers of native laborers. In the 1600s English tobacco farmers in North America also needed workers for their plantations. With a lack of Native American workers, they, too, needed another source of labor. Plantation owners in both North and South America wanted a cheap work force.
Some colonists, including Spanish priest Bartolome de Las Casas, suggested using enslaved Africans as workers. Africans had already developed immunity to European diseases. The colonists soon agreed that slaves from West Africa could be the solution to their labor needs.
Analyzing How did disease
contribute to the slave trade?
READING CHECK
The Slave Trade
In 1510 the Spanish government legalized the sale of slaves in its colonies. The first full cargo ship of Africans arrived in the Americas eight years later. Over the next century, more than a million enslaved Africans were brought to the Spanish and Portuguese colonies in the New World. The Dutch and English also became active in the slave trade.
Middle Passage
Enslavement was a horrible experience for the slaves. Most enslaved people had been captured in the interior of Africa, often by Africans who profited from selling slaves to Europeans. The captives were chained around the neck and then marched to the coast. This journey could be as long as 1,000 miles.
The Middle Passage was the voyage across the Atlantic Ocean that enslaved Africans were forced to endure. Africans were packed like cargo in the lower decks of the slave ships. The slaves were chained together and crammed
Academic Vocabulary structure the
way something is set up or organized
King Afonso to King Joao III
i
King Afonso of the African nation of Kongo wrote a letter to the king of Portugal in 1526 asking him to do what he could to stop the practice of taking African slaves.
Sir, Your Highness should know how our Kingdom is being lost in so many ways... [Merchants are taking every day our natives, sons of the land and the sons of our noblemen and vassals and our relatives, because the thieved and men of bad conscience grab them ... [T]hey grab them and get them to be sold; and so great, Sir, is the corruption and licentiousness [law breaking] that our country is being completely depopulated, and Your Highness should not agree with this nor accept it as in your service. And to avoid it we need from those
(your) Kingdoms no more than some priests and a few people to teach in schools, and no other goods except wine and flour for the holy sacrament [religious service].
-King Afonso of Kongo,
letter to the king of Portugal, 1526
ANALYSIS
SKILL , ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
1.	Why does Afonso ask the Portuguese king to help stop the slave trade?
2.	What does Afonso request from the king?
i
NEW EMPIRES IN THE AMERICAS 59
1.	Location Which state has the highest percentage of African Americans?
2.	Human-Environment Interaction Why might the modern African American population be centered in the South?
THE IMPACT
TODAY
More than half of Brazil's current population is of
African descent.
into spaces about the size of coffins. The height between the decks was sometimes only 18 inches.
In this confinement, disease spread quickly, killing many Africans. Others suffocated or died from malnutrition. Some slaves took their own lives to end their suffering. It is estimated that one out of every six Africans died during the Middle Passage. African Diaspora
Between the 1520s and 1860s about 12 million Africans were shipped across the Atlantic as slaves. More than 10 million of these captives survived the voyage and reached the Americas. The slave trade led to the African Diaspora. (A diaspora is the scattering of a people.) Enslaved Africans were sent all across the New World.
More than a third of the enslaved Africans, nearly 4 million people, were sent to Brazil. Most of those slaves were forced to work on Portuguese sugar plantations. Nearly 2 million slaves went to the colonies of New Spain. Some worked on plantations in the Caribbean, while others were taken to the mines of Peru and Mexico. Some 3 million slaves worked in British and French colonies in the Caribbean and Latin America. More than 600,000 slaves went to Britain's North American colonies that later became the United States.
Colonial leaders across the Americas developed laws that regulated slave treatment and behavior. Slaves were given few rights in the colonies. The law considered enslaved Africans to be property. In some colonies, a slaveholder was not charged with
CHAPTER 2
murder if he killed a slave while punishing him. Enslaved Africans, on the other hand, received harsh penalties for minor offenses, such as breaking a tool. Runaways were often tortured and sometimes killed.
The treatment of enslaved Africans varied. Some slaves reported that their masters treated them kindly. To protect their investment, some slaveholders provided adequate food and clothing for their slaves. However, severe treatment was very common. Whippings, brandings, and even worse torture were all part of American slavery.
Generalizing How were
enslaved Africans treated in the Americas?
READING CHECK .
Many slaves expressed themselves through art and dance. Dances were important social events in slave communities. Like most elements of slave culture, art and dance were heavily influenced by African traditions.
Identifying Points of
View Why was religion important to slaves in the Americas?
READING CHECK
I
Summary I wiped out
AND PREVIEW
After disease much of the Native American population, colonists turned to slave labor. In the next chapter you will learn about English colonies in the Americas. Slave Culture in the Americas
Slaves in the Americas came from many different parts of Africa. They spoke different languages and had different cultural backgrounds. But enslaved Africans also shared many customs and viewpoints. They built upon what they had in common to create a new African American culture.
Families were a vital part of slave culture. Families provided a refuge—a place not fully under the slaveholders' control. However, slave families faced many challenges. Families were often broken apart when a family member was sold to another owner. In Latin America, there were many more enslaved males than females. This made it difficult for slaves there to form stable families.
Religion was a second refuge for slaves. It gave enslaved Africans a form of expression that was partially free from their slaveholders' control. Slave religion was primarily Christian, but it included traditional elements from African religions as well. Religion gave slaves a sense of self worth and a hope for salvation in this life and the next. Spirituals were a common form of religious expression among slaves. Slaves also used songs and folktales to tell their stories of sorrow, hope, agony, and joy.
Section 5 Assessment	\
* Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
|	1. a. Recall Why did so many Native Americans die after
coming into contact with Europeans?
j b. Summarize Why did plantation owners turn to enslaved j Africans as a labor force? How did this lead to the creation j of the transatlantic slave trade?
>	2. a. Identify What was the Middle Passage?
■ b. Describe Explain how enslaved Africans were treated I after they reached the colonies in the Americas, j 3. a. Explain What are spirituals?
s b. Analyze How did religion and family provide a
I refuge from the harsh life enslaved Africans were forced to endure?
[ Critical Thinking
f 4. Identifying Cause and Effect Review your notes on the slave trade. Use a chart like the one below to explain the causes and the effects of the slave trade.
5. Writing about Slavery Add information about the f	beginnings of slavery in the Americas to your notes,
j	Include notes about slave culture. What refuges did
t enslaved people have from their suffering?
NEW EMPIRES IN THE AMERICAS 61

111
The slave system that arose in the American colonies was strongly influenced by geographic forces. The climate of the southern colonies was suited to growing certain crops, like cotton, tobacco, and sugarcane. These crops required a great deal of labor to grow and to process. To meet this great demand for labor, the colonists looked to one main source—enslaved Africans.
V- ' ••	•
<1
tTH AMERICA
.
Colonial Slave Ports Slave ships
sailed to slave ports, where they unloaded their human cargo. Slave ports like Boston, Newport, and Charleston were located near farming areas and the mouths of rivers.
■■
SOUTH
AMERfC«.< t1'*
The Middle Passage
The terrifying and deadly voyage across the Atlantic was known as the Middle Passage. Enslaved Africans were chained and crowded together under ships'decks on this long voyage, as this drawing shows.
20° S
The West Indies Africans were brought to the West Indies to work on large sugar plantations. Sugarcane thrived in the West Indies, but it required huge amounts of labor to grow.

1 i

Slave forts began as trading posts. R They were built near river mouths to provide easy access to both the sea and inland areas.

: Luis de Senegal j	AFRICA
■James Fort
Accra
Hl
• Il
L
Why .Assinie
■■

New England traders exchanged goods for slaves on the West African coast and then transported the slaves to the American colonies or to the West Indies.
Elmina slave fort, West Africa


AFRICA
/ -
/ A-

Slaves Brought to the Americas,	U
1493-1810	I
Kidnapped and Taken to a Slave Ship
Mahommah 6. Baquaqua was captured and sold into slavery as a young man. In this 1854 account, he recalls being taken to the African coast to board a slave ship.
“I was taken down to the river and placed on board a boat; the river was very large and branched off in two different directions, previous to emptying itself into the sea ... We were two nights and one day on this river, when we came to a ... place ... [where] the slaves were all put into a pen, and placed with our backs to the fire ... When all were ready to go aboard, we were chained together, and tied with ropes round about our necks, and were thus drawn down to the sea shore."
E 5

<u 4
IlilSSiSS
: of Capricorn
BSP



1493-1600	1601-1700	1701-1810
Years

GEOGRAPHY
SKILLS I INTERPRETING MAPS
are
i 1. Location Why were slave forts located where they were?
2. Human-Environment Interaction What geographic factors influenced the development of the Atlantic slave trade?
■Ik
■SSI!
Social Studies Skills
Analysis
Critical
Thinking
Civic
Participation
Study
Framing Historical Questions
Define the Skill J
One of the most valuable ways that people gain knowledge is by asking effective questions. An effective question is one that obtains the kind of information the person asking the question desires. The ability to frame, or construct, effective questions is an important life skill as well as a key to gaining a better understanding of history. Asking effective historical questions will aid you in studying history and in conducting historical research.
Learn the Skill
Effective questions are specific, straightforward, and directly related to the topic. When we do not obtain the information we want or need, often it is because we have asked the wrong questions. Asking effective questions is not as easy as it seems. It requires thought and preparation. The following guidelines will help you in framing effective questions about history and other topics as well.
1.	Determine exactly what you want to know.
2.	Decide what questions to ask and write them down. Having written questions is very important. They will help guide your study or research and keep you focused on your topic and goal.
you want to know. For example, if you wanted to know more about trade and the voyages of exploration that are discussed in Chapter 2, "What were the voyages of exploration?" may not be a good question to ask. This question is too broad. Its answer would not give you the information you want.
Asking "Why was trade the most important cause of the voyages of exploration?" would not be an effective question either. This question is biased because it assumes trade was the main reason for the voyages, when that might not have been true. Good historical investigation assumes nothing that is not known to be fact. A more effective question, which would get the information you want, is "Were trade and the voyages of exploration connected, and, if so, in what ways?" Do you see now why wording is so important in asking effective questions and why you should write out and review your questions beforehand?
Practice the Skill
Reread the information about Cortes and the Aztec on pages 46-47, then complete the activities below.
1.	Suppose you wanted to learn more about
Cortes's defeat of the Aztec. Decide whether each of the following would be an effective question to ask about this topic. Explain why or why not.
3.	Review each of your questions to make sure it is specific, straightforward, and directly related to your topic.
4.	Rewrite any questions that are vague, too broad, or biased.
Questions that are vague or too broad are likely to produce information not directly related to what
a.	What happened when the Aztec and the Spanish met?
b.	Why did other Indians betray the Aztec?
c.	What resources did Cortes have that helped him conquer the Aztec?
2.	Frame five questions that would be effective in helping you to learn more about this topic.
* CHAPTER 2
Chapter Review
Visual Summary
Use the visual summary below to help you review the main ideas of the chapter.
Early Exploration and Settlement
Reviewing Vocabulary,
Terms, and People
1.	The first Europeans to reach the east coast of
North America were the_____________.
2.	___________established a navigation school
and financed expeditions to the west coast of Africa.
3.	One of the most important European explorers
was______________, who was the first person to
claim lands in the Americas for Spain.
4.	The first voyage that sailed completely around
the world was headed by____________.
5.	Sir Walter Raleigh founded the colony of Virginia after receiving a____________, a grant to
set up a colony, from the queen of England.
6.	Large farms or__________, that specialize in
growing one type of crop for profit, were common in Spanish America.
Comprehension and
Critical Thinking
SECTION 1 (Pages 38-41)
7.	a. Recall On which two islands did the Vikings establish settlements before coming to North America?
b.	Analyze What factors led Europeans to begin their voyages of exploration?
c.	Evaluate What do you think motivated sailors to sign on for voyages of exploration?
SECTION 2 (Pages 42-45)
8.	a. Recall Why was Columbus's first voyage important?
b.	Summarize Explain the conflict that emerged between Spain and Portugal over their empires in the Americas and how it was resolved.
c.	Evaluate Do you think the Columbian Exchange improved life or made life worse in the Americas? Explain your answer.
NEW EMPIRES IN THE AMERICAS 65
SECTION 3 (Pages 46-51)
9.	a. Identify What territories in the Americas did Spain control?
b.	Analyze What factors enabled the Spanish to defeat the Aztec and the Inca?
c.	Elaborate Why was the encomienda system important to Spanish settlers?
SECTION 4 (Pages 52-57)
10.	a. Describe What were the results of the defeat of the Spanish Armada?
b.	Contrast How did the reasons for French settlement in the Americas differ from that of the English and Spanish? What was each of their economies based on?
c.	Predict What problems might arise among the different empires with settlements in North America?
SECTION 5 (Pages 58-61)
11.	a. Explain Why did the Spanish turn to enslaved Africans as a labor force in the Americas?
b.	Analyze In what ways did enslaved Africans create their own unique culture in the Americas?
c.	Evaluate What effects do you think slavery had on the populations and cultures of West African countries?
found. Through your online textbook, choose an explorer and then research the explorer's route and discoveries. Present your research in an annotated and illustrated map or log book. Write from the explorer's point of view and include information about the areas he explored.
7\ hmhsocialstudies.coml
Reading Skills
Outlining and History Use f/ie Reading Social Studies Skill taught in this chapter to answer the following question.
15.	Make a short but complete outline of the section on pages 50-51 under the heading "Spanish Treatment of Native Americans." Then use your outline to organize the topics covered in a list. Use the outline to write one or two sentences that describe each of these topics.
Social Studies Skills
Framing Historical Questions Use the Social Studies Skill taught in this chapter to answer the following question.
16.	Write a historical question for each of the five sections of this chapter.
Reviewing Themes
12.	Geography What geographic features in North America helped and hindered the exploration and colonization of the continent?
13.	Politics In what way were the expansions of empires motivated by the politics among European nations?
Using the Internet
14.	Activity: Illustrated Map Columbus's
successful return from the New World sparked an interest in exploration that resulted in a dramatic increase in voyages of exploration. Each explorer mapped his route and the lands that he explored. Our knowledge of the New World increased quickly as explorers made maps and kept detailed logs to catalog what they
> CHAPTER 2
17. Writing Your Letter First, review your notes and decide which group you want to write about. Which details from your notes will your friends and family be most interested
in? Which do you find most important? What do you want to tell your family and friends about the Americas?
DIRECTIONS:
Read each question and write the letter of the best response. 1	Which of the following best illustrates the process known as the Columbian Exchange?
A
Christopher Columbus sailed west to reach Asia and encountered the Americas. B
Corn and tomatoes were introduced to Europe from America. C
Asian goods moved long distances along the Silk Road to reach Europe. D
Advances in technology allowed sailors to better navigate on the open seas. 2	The decimation of the native population of the Americas and the need for plantation labor resulted in the
F encomienda system.
G establishment of religious tolerance.
H transatlantic slave trade.
J
Columbian Exchange. 3	The desire to convert people to Christianity and the demand for Asian trade goods led to
A increased interest in exploration.
B the Renaissance.
C the conquest of the Americas.
D efforts to end the slave trade.
4	Spain’s empire in the Americas included which of the following?
F
New York G Virginia H Mexico J Canada 5	Which of the following established colonies in North America?
A the Portuguese B the Dutch C the Greeks D the Romans
6	The voyage of enslaved Africans across the Atlantic to the Americas was known as the
F
Northwest Passage. G
African Diaspora. H triangular trade.
J
Middle Passage. 7	Examine the following passage from Bernal Diaz del Castillo’s account of an Aztec marketplace. Then answer the question below.
Z/The bustle and noise caused by this large crowd of people was so great that it could be heard more than four miles away. Some of our men, who had traveled through Italy, said that they never had seen a marketplace that covered so large an area, which was so well regulated, and so crowded with people as this one at Mexico.
—Bernal Diaz del Castillo, adapted from The Memoirs of the Conquistador Bernal Diaz del Castillo
Document-Based Question What is the author’s impression of the Aztec marketplace? How can you tell?

NEW EMPIRES IN THE AMERICAS 67
HISTORY
MULTIMEDIA CONNECTIONS
CLICK THROUGH
1	i i irvuuvi i
INTER ACTIVITIES
hmhsocialstudies.com
>1
Caribbean Island Encounters
Watch the video to learn about the first encounters between Spanish explorers and the people of the Caribbean.


Claiming Florida for Spain
Watch the video to learn about Ponce de Leon's first landing on the coast of what is now Florida.

llili

•A.r
isn
- Cape C

v SsbSws^sb-

The Spanish conquistador Juan Ponce de Leon was the first European to set foot on land that later became part of the United States.
Ponce de Leon first sailed to the Americas with Christopher Columbus on his second voyage in 1493. Once in the Caribbean region, he helped conquer what is now Puerto Rico and was named ruler of the island. In Puerto Rico, Ponce de Leon heard about a nearby island that supposedly held
the legendary Fountain of Youth. Its waters were said to make old people young again. In 1513, Ponce de Leon set out to find the island but instead landed in what is now Florida. He named Florida and claimed it for Spain.
Explore important events in the life of Ponce de Leon online, You can find a wealth of information, video clips, primary sources, activities, and more at I
71 hmhsocialstudies.com
jin?
Ponce de Leon's 1513 Route
Study the map to learn about the region of the Americas that Ponce de Leon explored in 1513.
1620
The Pilgrims sign the Mayflower Compact.
SECTION 5: Conflict in the Colonies...........................98
The Big Idea Tensions developed as the British government placed tax after tax on the colonies.
. on Writing	(llOHS
Writing an Infomercial What if television had been invented during the time that the English colonies were being founded in North America? Instead of relying on printed flyers and word of mouth to attract settlers, the founders of colonies might have made infomercials. In this chapter you will read about life in the American colonies during different times. You will choose one time period and colony and write an infomercial encouraging English citizens to settle in the colony of your choice.
1648
Work is finished on - India's Taj 1' Mahal.






Save Our History: HISTORY Secrets of Jamestown
71 hmhsocialstudies.com



VIDEO
JEX*'



1	M
.11

a,.
f •
Plymouth Colony thrives again in this highly accurate re-creation.
-< / /............
1681
William Penn establishes the colony of Pennsylvania.
1682
Peter the Great becomes czar of Russia.
1	1763
I
Pontiac, an y American Indian, ' leads a rebellion on the western frontier.
1773
Patriots stage the Boston Tea Party.
1768
British explorer James Cook sets sail on his first trip to the South Pacific, meeting people like this Sandwich Islander.
THE ENGLISH COLONIES 69
Reading Social Studies
1
Economics
Geography
Politics
Society and Culture
Science and Technology
Focus on Themes In this chapter you will read about the people who settled the early colonies of North America. You will learn about the problems they faced. You will see how they settled political
differences (sometimes peacefully, other times not) and learned how to trade goods and grow crops to establish a thriving economy. You will discover that the economy often influenced their politics.
Evaluating Sources
FOCUS
On Reading Historians study both primary and secondary sources to learn about the past. By studying both types, they can get a better picture of what life was like. Assessing Primary and Secondary Sources
However, not all sources are accurate or reliable. Checklists like the ones below can help you judge which sources are reliable and worth using in your research. Be sure to confirm facts in one source with other reliable sources. When you use facts in a report, you should always cite the source where you located the information.
Evaluating Language if a source uses biased or emotional language or has many factual or grammatical errors, it may not be valid. If the author states opinions as if they were facts, the source may be inaccurate.
Visual Sources Visual sources may be invalid if they contain factual errors or depictions of biased stereotypes. Remember that sometimes videos or photographs are fake or created for entertainment. A movie about the colony at Jamestown, for example, may not be historically accurate.
Not everyone who writes about history is a good historian. Try to ; use sources by qualified writers.
Good historians will always tell you where they got their information.
If information isn't documented, you can't always trust that it is true or accurate.

Checklist for Secondary Sources
/ Who is the author or creator? What are his or her credentials or qualifications?
/ Where did the author get his or her information?
/ Is the information in the source properly documented?
/ Has the author or creator drawn valid conclusions from his or her sources?
