434 CHAPTER 14
1817
Thomas Gallaudet founds a school for people who have hearing impairments.
1820
1830 L
1824
British laws making trade unions illegal are repealed.
1831
William Lloyd Garrison begins publishing the abolitionist newspaper the Liberator.
1829 French educator Louis Braille creates a writing system of raised dots for people who are blind.
4
1848
! A major meeting for women's :	rights—the Seneca Falls
AN’S bi&hts	Convention—is held in New York.
I
1845 A potato famine in Ireland increases Irish immigration to the United States.
1850 Nathaniel Hawthorne publishes The Scarlet Letter.
1848
Revolutionaries attempt to unify German-speaking peoples in central Europe.
i
Reading Social Studies
Economics	Geography	Politics
Society and Culture
Science and Technology
Focus on Themes The mid-1800s was a time of change in America. Society and culture changed for several reasons: thousands of immigrants arrived in America; women began to work hard for equal rights; and the North and South debated more and
more over the slavery issue. Religious beliefs helped shape people's views toward abolition—the move to end slavery—and women's suffrage—the move to give women the right to vote. This chapter discusses these issues.


Recognizing Implied Main Ideas
FOCUS
On Reading When you read, you will notice that not every paragraph has a main idea sentence. Sometimes the main idea is implied. Implied Main Ideas While main ideas give a basic structure to a paragraph, supporting details help convince the reader of the author's point. Main ideas can be presented in a sentence or simply implied. Usually, a paragraph without a main idea sentence will still have an implied main idea that ties the sentences together.
Notice how one reader found the main idea of the following paragraph.

Cities during this time were compact and
crowded. Many people lived close enough to their jobs that they could walk to work. Wagons carried goods down streets paved
with stones, making a noisy, busy scene.
One observer noted that the professionals
in New York City always had a "hurried
walk." (p. 440)
This description of cities makes it sound like cities had too many people.
This sentence describes cities as loud and busy.
This quote makes it sound like people in cities were always in a rush. I think the main idea is something like “Cities were crowded, loud, and fast-paced.”
436 CHAPTER 14
IfayTeims
and LP<e@pJ@
You Try It!
Read the following paragraph and then answer the questions below.
The most famous and daring conductor on the Underground Railroad was Harriet Tubman. When Tubman escaped slavery in chapter 14 1849, she left behind her family. She swore p. 458 that she would return and lead her whole family to freedom in the North. Tubman returned to the South 19 times, successfully leading her family and more than 300 other slaves to freedom. At one time the reward for Tubman's capture reportedly climbed to $40,000, a huge amount of money at that time.
V.	________________.___._____________—..............
After you read the passage, complete the following activites.
1.	List two ideas that this paragraph discusses.
2.	How are these two ideas related to each other?
3.	Write an example of the main idea of this paragraph. Use standard spelling, grammar, sentence structure, and punctuation.
Chapter 14
Section 1
nativists (p. 440)
Know-Nothing Party Ip. 440) middle class (p. 440) tenements (p. 442)
Section 2
transcendentalism (p. 443)
Ralph Waldo Emerson (p. 443) Margaret Fuller (p. 443)
Henry David Thoreau (p. 443) utopian communities (p. 444)
Nathaniel Hawthorne (p. 444)
Edgar Allan Poe (p. 445)
Emily Dickinson (p. 445)
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (p. 445) Walt Whitman (p. 445)
Section 3
Second Great Awakening (p. 448) Charles Grandison Finney Ip. 448) Lyman Beecher (p. 448) temperance movement Ip. 449) Dorothea Dix Ip. 450) common-school movement (p. 450) Horace Mann (p. 450)
Catharine Beecher (p. 451)
Thomas Gallaudet (p. 451)
Section 4
abolition (p. 454)
William Lloyd Garrison (p. 455) American Anti-Slavery Society Ip. 455) Angelina and Sarah Grimke (p. 455) Frederick Douglass (p. 458)
Sojourner Truth (p. 456)
Underground Railroad Ip. 456)
Harriet Tubman (p. 458)
Section 5
Elizabeth Cady Stanton (p. 464) Lucretia Mott Ip. 464)
Seneca Falls Convention Ip. 464) Declaration of Sentiments (p. 464) Lucy Stone Ip. 465)
Susan B. Anthony Ip. 465)
As you read Chapter 14, locate the main idea of any paragraph you do not understand.
Academic Vocabulary
implicit (p. 440) abstract (p. 444)
MEW MOVEMENTS IN AMERICA 43

SECTION
»«
1
TEKS 5C, 10C,11C, 12C, 13B, 21A, 23A,23B, 23C,25B, 27B,28B
What You Will Learn...
. Millions of immigrants, mostly
German and Irish, arrived in the United States despite anti-immigrant movements. Industrialization led to the growth of cities.
American cities experienced urban problems due to rapid growth.
The population of the United States grew rapidly in the early 1800s with the arrival of millions of immigrants.
Key Terms
nativists, p. 440 Know-Nothing Party, p. 440 middle class, p. 440 tenements, p. 442
hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the causes of immigration and urban growth.
ImmiQirsmts and Unwin CZhallan^as
If YOU were there...
It is 1850, and you are a German immigrant standing on the deck of a steamboat, crossing Lake Erie. Other immigrants are on board, but they are strangers to you. Soon, you will arrive at your new home in Cleveland, Ohio. You've been told that other Germans have settled there. You hope to find friends and work as a baker. Right now, America seems very big and very strange.
What would you expect from your new life in America?
Building Background The revolutions in industry, transportation, and technology were not the only major changes in the United States in the mid-1800s. Millions of immigrants, mostly from Europe, swelled the population. Some settled in the rich farmland of the Midwest, while others moved to cities.
Millions of Immigrants Arrive
In the mid-1800s, large numbers of immigrants crossed the Atlantic Ocean to begin new lives in the United States. More than 4 million of them settled in the United States between 1840 and 1860, most from Europe. More than 3 million of these immigrants arrived from Ireland and Germany. Many of them were fleeing economic or political troubles in their native countries.
Fleeing the Irish Potato Famine
Most immigrants from the British Isles during that period were Irish. In the mid-1840s, potato blight, a disease that causes rot in potatoes, left many families in Ireland with little food. More than a million Irish people died of starvation and disease. Even more fled to the United States.
Most Irish immigrants were very poor. Many settled in cities in Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, and Pennsylvania. They worked at unskilled jobs in the cities or on building canals and
438 CHAPTER 14


railroads. Irish women often worked as domestic servants for wealthy families, laboring 16 or more hours per day. In 1849 a Boston health committee reported that low wages forced most Irish immigrants to live in poor housing.
Still, many immigrants enjoyed a new feeling of equality. Patrick Dunny wrote home to his family about this situation.
^People that cuts a great dash [style] at home... think it strange [in the United States] for the humble class of people to get as much respect as themselves/'
—Patrick Dunny, quoted in Who Built America?
by Bruce Levine etal.
A
Failed German Revolution Many Germans also came to the United States during this time. In the early 1800s, many Germans came to the United States to escape religious persecution. Then in 1848 some Germans staged a revolution against harsh
rule. Some educated Germans fled to the United States to escape persecution caused by their political activities. Most German immigrants, however, were working class, and they
■	came for economic reasons. The United States seemed to offer both greater economic opportunity and more freedom from government
■	control. While most Irish immigrants were
Catholics, German immigrant groups included Catholics, Jews, and Protestants.
German immigrants were more likely than the Irish to become farmers and live in rural areas. They moved to midwestem states where more land suited to agriculture was available. Unlike the Irish, a high percentage of German immigrants arrived in the United States with money. Despite their funds and skills, German immigrants often were forced to take low-paying jobs. Many German immigrants worked as tailors, seamstresses, bricklayers, servants, clerks, cabinetmakers, bakers, and food merchants.
THE IMPACT
TODAY
Many immigrants still come to the United States today. The United States has granted permanent resident status to an average of 1 million immigrants each year since 2000.
NEW MOVEMENTS IN AMERICA 43
Academic
Vocabulary
implicit
understood though not clearly put into words
FOCUS ON
Reading What is the main idea of the paragraph to the right? Anti-Immigration Movements
Industrialization and the waves of people from Europe greatly changed the American labor force. While many immigrants went to the Midwest to get farmland, other immigrants filled the need for cheap labor in towns and cities. Industrial jobs in the Northeast attracted many people.
Yet a great deal of native-born Americans feared losing their jobs to immigrants who might work for lower wages. Some felt implicitly threatened by the new immigrants' cultures and religions. For example, before Catholic immigrants arrived, most Americans were Protestants. Conflicts between Catholics and Protestants in Europe caused American Protestants to mistrust Catholic immigrants. Those Americans and others who opposed immigration were called nativists.
In the 1840s and 1850s some nativists became politically active. An 1844 election flyer gave Americans this warning.
^Look at the... thieves and vagabonds [tramps] roaming our streets... monopolizing [taking] the business which properly belongs to our own native and true-born citizens. „
—Election flyer, quoted in Who Built America?
by Bruce Levine etal.
In 1849 nativists founded a political organization, the Know-Nothing Party, that supported measures making it difficult for foreigners to become citizens or hold office. Its members wanted to keep Catholics and immigrants out of public office. They also wanted to require immigrants to live in the United States for 21 years before becoming citizens. Know-Nothing politicians had some success getting elected during the 1850s. Later, disagreements over the issue of slavery caused the party to fall apart. As the immigrants assimilated to life in the United States, nativist complaints became less common.
Understanding Cause and
Effect Why did the Know-Nothing Party try to limit the rights of immigrants?
READING CHECK
Rapid Growth of Cities
The Industrial Revolution led to the creation of many new jobs in American cities. These city jobs drew immigrants from many nations as well as migrants from rural parts of the United States. The Transportation Revolution helped connect cities and made it easier for people to move to them. As a result of these two trends, American cities grew rapidly during the mid-1800s. Cities in the northeastern and Middle Atlantic states grew the most. By the mid-1800s, three-quarters of the country's manufacturing jobs were in these areas.
The rise of industry and the growth of cities changed American life. Those who owned their own businesses or worked in skilled jobs benefited most from those changes. The families of these merchants, manufacturers, professionals, and master craftspeople made up a growing social class. This new middle class was a social and economic level between the wealthy and the poor. Those in the new middle class built large, dignified homes that demonstrated their place in society.
In the growing cities, people found entertainment and an enriched cultural life. Many enjoyed visiting places such as libraries and clubs, or attending concerts or lectures. In the mid-1800s people also attended urban theaters. Favorite pastimes included bowling, boxing, and playing cards. The rules of baseball were formalized in 1845, and the game became increasingly popular.
Cities during this time were compact and crowded. Many people lived close enough to their jobs that they could walk to work. Wagons carried goods down streets paved with stones, making a noisy, busy scene. One observer noted that the professionals in New York City always had a "hurried walk."
Summarizing How did the
Industrial Revolution affect life in American cities?
READING CHECK .
440 CHAPTER 14
History Close-up
!®BI!
New York City,
Mid-1800s
In the mid-1800s, cities such as New York City lured thousands of people in search of jobs and a better life. Many city dwellers found life difficult in the crowded urban conditions.
I
Many city residents, particularly immigrants, lived in crowded, unsafe conditions. Many immigrants and other poor city dwellers
toilil worked long hours in factories at dangerous jobs.
Women—and frequently children-—labored all day in small rooms making clothing to be sold to the wealthy.
City streets were crowded with people buying, selling, and transporting goods.
The first floor of the building served many purposes— living quarters, kitchen, and work space. Here, garments were finished for sale.
ANALYSIS
SKILL
Analyzing visuals How is this scene similar to one you might see in a large American city today? How is it different?
IN AMERICA 44
Urban Problems
American cities in the mid-1800s faced many challenges due to rapid growth. Because public and private transportation was limited, city residents had to live near their workplaces. In addition, there was a lack of safe housing. Many city dwellers, particularly immigrants, could afford to live only in tenements—poorly designed apartment buildings that housed large numbers of people. These structures were often dirty, overcrowded, and unsafe.
Public services were also poor. The majority of cities did not have clean water, public health regulations, or healthful ways to get rid of garbage and human and animal waste. Under these conditions, diseases spread easily, and epidemics were common. In 1832 and 1849, for example, New York City suffered cholera epidemics that killed thousands.
City life held other dangers. As urban areas grew, they became centers of criminal activity. Most cities—including New York, Boston, and Philadelphia—had no permanent or organized force to fight crime. Instead, they relied on volunteer night watches, which offered little protection. Some of the violence was often
between various ethnic or racial groups, who had different economic and social goals. Immigrants often came from a mix of social classes, which also led to conflict among groups. Differences in political goals and opinions also led to disagreements between groups.
Fire was another constant and serious danger in crowded cities. There was little organized fire protection. Most cities were served by volunteer fire companies. Firefighters used hand pumps and buckets to put out fires. In addition, there were not enough sanitation workers and road maintenance crews. These shortages and flaws caused health and safety problems for many city residents.
READING CHECK
Analyzing Why did so many American cities have problems in the mid-1800s?
Summary and Preview immigrants expected a better life in America, but not all Americans welcomed newcomers. The rapid growth of cities caused many problems. In the next section you will read about how America developed its own style of art and literature.
Section 1 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
mm*)
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify Who were the nativists? Wnat immigrant groups were they a reaction to?
b.	Compare and Contrast In what ways were the causes of Irish and German immigration to the United States similar and different? What environmental and societal factors led to each?
c.	Predict How might the rise of anti-immigrant groups lead to problems in the United States?
2.	a. Describe What led to the growth of cities? b. Analyze How did the rise of industrialization and the growth of cities change American society?
3.	a. Describe What were tenements?
b.	Summarize What problems affected American cities in the mid-1800s? Which groups came into conflict as a result of urbanization?
c.	Evaluate What do you think was the biggest problem facing cities in the United States? Why?
d.	Draw Conclusions How did the increase in the number of immigrants in cities affect the problem of nativism?
Critical Thinking
4. Identifying Cause and Effect Review your notes on the causes of immigration and urban growth. Then add the effects of each to your graphic organizer.
Immigration —►
Effects
Urban Growth —■►
Effects
5. Identifying Important Events In your notebook, create a two-column chart. In the first column, list events described in this section and by your teacher in class. In the second column, write a description of each event and a note about how it changed life in the United States.
442 CHAPTER 14
jAkfln ©irican .^Ajrits
If YOU were there...
You are a teacher living in Massachusetts in the 1840s. Some of your neighbors have started an experimental community. They want to live more simply than present-day society allows. They hope to have time to write and think, while still sharing the work. Some people will teach; others will raise food. You think this might be an interesting place to live.
What would you ask the leaders of the community?
i
I

1.	Transcendentalists and utopian communities withdrew from American society.
2.	American Romantic painters and writers made important contributions to art and literature.
[ The Big Idea]
BUILDING BACKGROUND
Great changes were taking place in | American culture. The early 1800s brought a revolution in American j 1 thought. Artists, writers, and philosophers pursued their ideals and	\
f developedtruly American styles.	;
L	j
T ranscendentalists
Some New England writers and philosophers found spiritual wisdom in transcendentalism, the belief that people could transcend, or rise above, material things in life. Transcendentalists also believed that people should depend on themselves and their own insights, rather than on outside authorities. Important transcendentalists included Ralph Waldo Emerson, Margaret Fuller, and Henry David Thoreau.
New movements in art and literature influenced many Americans in the early 1800s.
i Key Terms and People
transcendentalism, p. 443 ; Ralph Waldo Emerson, p. 443
Margaret Fuller, p. 443 ; Henry David Thoreau, p. 443 [ utopian communities, p. 444 ■ Nathaniel Hawthorne, p. 444 } Edgar Allan Poe, p. 445 ; Emily Dickinson, p. 445 i Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, p. 445 • Walt Whitman, p. 445
* wl
hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the new movements in art and literature.
Walden Pond, where Thoreau lived for two years


MOVEMENTS IN AMERICA 4
Academic
Vocabulary
abstract
expressing a quality or idea without reference to an actual thing
Emerson was a popular writer and thinker who argued that Americans should disregard institutions and follow their own beliefs. "What I must do is all that concerns me, not what the people think," he wrote in an essay called "Self-Reliance." Fuller edited the famous transcendentalist publication The Dial. Thoreau advised even stronger self-reliance and simple living away from society in natural settings. He wrote his book Walden after living for two years at Walden Pond. He also wrote the essay Civil Disobedience after spending a night in jail. He had been arrested for refusing to pay a tax, in protest of the Mexican-American War and its role in the spread of slavery.
Some transcendentalists formed a community at Brook Farm, Massachusetts, in the 1840s. It was one of many experiments with utopian communities, groups of people who tried to form a perfect society. People in utopian communities pursued abstract spirituality and cooperative lifestyles. Communities sprang up in New Harmony, Oneida, and elsewhere. However, few lasted for long.
READING CHECK .
Drawing Inferences
Why did utopian communities last a short time?
American Romanticism
Ideas about the simple life and nature also inspired painters and writers in the early and mid-1800s. Some joined the Romantic movement that had begun in Europe. Romanticism involved a great interest in nature, an emphasis on individual expression, and a rejection of many established rules. These painters and writers felt that each person brings a unique view to the world. They believed in using emotion to guide their creative output. Some Romantic artists, like Thomas Cole, painted the American landscape. Their works showed the beauty and wonder of nature in the United States. Their images contrasted with the huge cities and corruption of nature that many Americans saw as typical of Europe. American Romanticism allowed Americans to see themselves both as part of a European tradition of culture and as a new, unique culture.
Many female writers, like Ann Sophia Stephens, wrote historical fiction that was popular in the mid-1800s. New England writer Nathaniel Hawthorne wrote The Scarlet Letter during that period. One of the greatest classics of Romantic literature, it explored Puritan life in the 1600s. Hawthorne's friend Herman
444 CHAPTER 14
CONNECT TO THE ARTS
Artists of the Romantic movement celebrated nature in their dramatic paintings. Their work was made popular by their leader, Thomas Cole. Other important painters of the era were Frederick Church and Asher Durand.
What words would you use to describe this painting?
O
The light in the painting has a delicate, glowing quality. Artists of the Romantic movement pioneered this technique. © The human presence in this scene is dwarfed by nature but is in harmony with it.
Poe, also a short story writer, became famous for a haunting poem called "The Raven." Other gifted American poets included Emily Dickinson, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, and Walt Whitman. Most of Dickinson's short, thoughtful poems were not published until after her death. Longfellow, the best-known poet of the mid-1800s, wrote popular story-poems, like The Song of Hiawatha. Whitman praised American individualism and democracy in his simple, unrhymed poetry. In his poetry collection Leaves of Grass, he wrote, "The United States themselves are essentially the greatest poem."
Harvest in the Wilderness
READING CHECK
Summarizing Who were some American Romantic authors, and why were they important?
Melville, a writer and former sailor, wrote novels about the sea, such as Moby-Dick and Billy Budd. Many people believe that Moby-Dick is one of the finest American novels ever written.
American Romantic authors also wrote a great deal of poetry. The poet Edgar Allan
I SUMMARY AND PREVIEW
American I Romantic artists and authors were inspired by ideas about the simple life, nature, and spirituality. In the next section you will learn about ideas that changed Amer- ican society.
Section 2 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
i 1. a. Identify What were the main teachings 1	of transcendentalism?
i	b. Describe Why was Henry David Thoreau
t	arrested? What effect do you think his	action had on
S	the abolition movement?
( c. Summarize What was one utopian community established in the United States, and what was its goal?
d. Elaborate Do you agree with transcendentalists that Americans put too much emphasis on institutions and traditions? Explain your answer.
2. a. Recall Who were some important American authors and poets at this time?
b.	Explain What ideas did artists in the Romantic movement express?
c.	Evaluate Do you think the Romantic movement was important to American culture? Explain.
Critical Thinking
3. Comparing and Contrasting Review your notes on art and literature.Then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to show the similarities and differences between the two movements.

<5
Transcendentalism
C^Sirn^
Romanticism
"^WriteSmart
4.	Describing Artistic Movements Two artistic movements are described in this section, transcendentalism and romanticism. Write these two movements in the first column of your chart. Then in the second column, write a brief description of each and explain how writings from each either described or influenced life in the United States.
NEW MOVEMENTS IN AMERICA 4
a Literature in History
Literature of the Young Nation:
Romanticism and Realism
Guided Reading
from "The Midnight Ride of Paul Revere"
by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (1807-1882)
Word Help___________________ j
belfry bell tower
muster gathering
barrack building where soldiers meet grenadiers soldiers that belong to a special regiment
j
O
When the poem was written, there were still a few ■ people alive who had lived during the Revolution. © Longfellow uses poetic	i
language to make Revere's story more dramatic.	;
© The sounds of the night	j
are described to help the	;
reader feel the excitement.	•
About the Reading "The Midnight Ride of Paul Revere" was published in a book called Tales of a Wayside Inn. The book is a collection of poems that tell well-known stories from history and mythology. By including the story of Paul Revere with other famous stories, Longfellow helped increase the importance of Paul Revere's ride.
As You Read
Notice how Longfellow describes Revere as a hero.
Listen my children and you shall hear Of the midnight ride of Paul Revere,
On the eighteenth of April, in Seventy-five;
Hardly a man is now alive
Who remembers that famous day and year. O
1
He said to his friend, "If the British march By land or sea from the town to-night,
Hang a lantern aloft in the belfry arch Of the North Church tower as a signal light,— One if by land, and two if by sea;
And I on the opposite shore will be,
Ready to ride and spread the alarm Through every ... village and farm,
For the country folk to be up and to arm." ©
Meanwhile, his friend, through alley and street Wanders and watches with eager ears,
Till in the silence around him he hears The muster of men at the barrack door,
The sound of arms, and the tramp of feet,
And the measured tread of the grenadiers, Marching down to their boats on the shore. ©
446 CHAPTER 14
from Little Women
by Louisa May Alcott (1832-1888)
Guided Reading
About the Reading Little Women is a novel about four sisters living in a small New England town before the Civil War. Still popular with young people today, Little Women describes a family much like the one Louisa May Alcott grew up in. Alcott based the main character, Jo March, on herself. Like Alcott, Jo was different from most women of her time. She was outspoken, eager for adventure, and in conflict with the role her society expected her to play.
AS YOU READ J
Try to understand how Jo is different from Aunt March.
Jo happened to suit Aunt March, who was lame and needed an active person to wait upon her. The childless old lady had offered to adopt one of the girls when the troubles came, and was much offended because her offer was declined ...
The old lady wouldn't speak to them for a time, but happening to meet Jo at a friend's,... she proposed to take her for a companion. O This did not suit Jo at all, but she accepted the place since nothing better appeared, and to everyone's surprise, got on remarkably well with her irascible relative ...
I suspect that the real attraction was a large library of fine books, which was left to dust and spiders since Uncle March died ... The dim, dusty room, with the busts staring down from the tall bookcases, the cozy chairs, the globes, and, best of all, the wilderness of books, in which she could wander where she liked, made the library a region of bliss to her ... ©
Jo's ambition was to do something very splendid. What it was she had no idea, as yet, but left it for time to tell her, and, meanwhile, found her greatest affliction in the fact that she couldn't read, mn, and ride as much as she liked. © A quick temper, sharp tongue, and restless spirit were always getting her into scrapes, and her life was a series of ups and downs, which were both comic and pathetic. But the training she received at Aunt March's was just what she needed, and the thought that she was doing something to support herself made her happy in spite of the perpetual "Josy-phine!"
i Word Help___________________
lame disabled irascible difficult bliss happiness
I ambition hope for the future ' affliction problem , pathetic very sad 1 perpetual constant
t O Some women kept L companions to help enter-| tain them and perform small ‘ chores. Why might Jo not ? want to be a companion? h
5; © How was Jo different ; from most women in the
1880s?
J © What might Jo be able to ■ do for work in the 1800s?
s
■
Connecting Literature to History
1. Drawing Conclusions Henry Wadsworth Longfellow was the most popular American poet of his time. How does his version of Paul Revere's ride increase the importance of the story?
2. Comparing and Contrasting The lives of women in the 1800s were very different from the lives of women today. How does this excerpt of Little Women show some similarities and differences between now and then?
NEW MOVEMENTS IN
AMEf ICA 44' History and Geography
During the first half of the nineteenth century, daily life changed dramatically , because of new inventions, scientific discoveries, and technological advances. These developments affected the way people interacted with each other and acquired the basics of life.
Basic goods such as meat, flour, gloves, clocks, candles, and soap began to be manufactured outside of the home and sold to distant markets. Specific cities sometimes became known for particular items. The steamboats and railroads of the Transportation Revolution made these goods less expensive to ship, and therefore less expensive to buy.
People across the nation began to have the same products, leading to an increased sense that all Americans had access to the same quality of products.
Scientific Discoveries The first use of anesthetics improved medical care. Before safe painkillers were developed, many surgeries were impossible because of the severe pain they would cause. The first use of an anesthetic occurred in 1842, during a dental extraction. In 1844 the hypodermic syringe was invented, leading to better treatment of a variety of illnesses. Changes in medical care brought about by scientific discoveries continue to today, and they continue to improve daily life. Doctors today are able to perform organ transplants because of modern anesthetics, leading to longer lives for many.
f47a CHAPTER 14
^Detroit
Erie Cans
7~
CD
X
c
>tamford
Salem
Boston
Brockton


•	Manufacturing center		Machinery
	Textiles		Meat packing
©	Clocks	2S	Shoes
	Flour	(gloves)	Other products
0 1		50	100 Miles		
6	50	100 Kilometers		
v			J
Xs
Buffalo: Flour



iron or steej>Troy^
IkNeWBedford |
' <X X
’Cleveland
Youngstown •
*rrovic»i
r*T - Hartford’ < ©crass; b I Vgijns) Waterbury* - -
c c*1
^HA’atersor S /Newark
New aven
New, Brunswick
NEW MOVEMENTS IN AMERICA 44
©S* Trenton
Philadelphia^p/Qi'on or steel )
Brandywine'
<w/ NJ ;
Baltimore* I 'K X
\ y/
Mass Production of
Everyday Goods Items that were once produced locally or by individual households became mass produced and sold across the nation. Soap, clocks, candles,clothing, furniture, needles, silverware, shoes, hats, door hinges and handles, guns—almost every basic item found in daily life began to be mass produced. It changed the way Americans made their livings and spent their free time.
What You Will Learn...
J
1.	The Second Great Awakening sparked interest in religion.
2.	Social reformers began to speak out about temperance and prison reform.
3.	Improvements in education reform affected many segments of the population.
4.	Northern African American communities became involved in reform efforts.
ib—....... 1.1	s
Reform Society
If YOU were there...
You live in New York State in the 1850s. You are the oldest daughter in your family. Since childhood you have loved mathematics, which puzzles your family. Your sisters are happy learning to sew and cook and run a household. You want more. You know that there is a female seminary nearby, where you could study and learn much more. But your parents are undecided.
How might you persuade your parents to send you to the school?
Reform movements in the early 1800s affected religion, education, and society.

Key Terms and People
Second Great Awakening, p. 448 Charles Grandison Finney, p. 448 Lyman Beecher, p. 448 temperance movement, p. 449 Dorothea Dix, p. 450 common-school movement, p. 450 Horace Mann, p. 450 Catharine Beecher, p. 451 Thomas Gallaudet, p. 451
’"'■jT hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to list the important events of the reform movements.
BDING BACKGROUND
Along with changes in American culture, I es were also taking place in American society. A religious revival the country. Reform-minded men and women tried to improve all aspects of society, from schools to taverns. Reforms in education opened up new opportunities for young women.	ij
Second Great Awakening
During the 1790s and early 1800s, some Americans took part in a Christian renewal movement called the Second Great Awakening. It swept through towns across upstate New York and through the frontier regions of Kentucky, Ohio, Tennessee, and South Carolina. By the 1820s and 1830s, this new interest in religion had spread to New England and the South.
Charles Grandison Finney was one of the most important leaders of the Second Great Awakening. After experiencing a dramatic religious conversion in 1821, Finney left his career as a lawyer and began preaching. He challenged some traditional Protestant beliefs, telling congregations that each individual was responsible for his or her own salvation. He also believed that sin was avoidable. Finney held revivals, emotional prayer meetings that lasted for days. Many people converted to Christianity during these revivals. Finney told new converts to prove their faith by doing good deeds.
Finney's style of preaching and his ideas angered some traditional ministers, like Boston's Lyman Beecher. Beecher wanted to prevent Finney from holding revivals in his city. "You mean to
448 CHAPTER 14
carry a streak of fire to Boston. If you attempt it, as the Lord liveth, I'll meet you . . . and fight every inch of the way." Despite the opposition of Beecher and other traditional ministers, Finney's appeal remained powerful. Also, the First Amendment guarantee of freedom of religion prevented the government from passing laws banning the new religious practices. Ministers were therefore free to spread their message of faith and salvation to whoever wished to listen.
Due to the efforts of Finney and his followers, church membership across the country grew a great deal during the Second Great Awakening. Many new church members were women and African Americans. The African Methodist Episcopal Church spread across the Middle Atlantic states. Although the movement had begun in the Northeast and on the frontier, the Second Great Awakening renewed some people's religious faith throughout America.
Drawing Conclusions
What impact did the Second Great Awakening have on religion in America?
READING CHECK .
Social Reformers Speak Out
Renewed religious faith often led to movements to fix the problems of urban growth. One solution was political action. For example, in 1844 New York City created the first city police force.
Members of the growing middle class, especially women, often led the efforts. Many of the women did not work outside the home and hired servants to care for their households. This gave them time to work in reform groups. The 1830s to the 1850s were an era of many reform movements.
Temperance Movement
Many social reformers worked to prevent alcohol abuse. They believed that Americans drank too much. In the 1830s, on average, an American consumed seven gallons of alcohol per year. Countless Americans thought that alcohol abuse caused social problems, such as family violence, poverty, and criminal behavior.
Americans' worries about the effects of alcohol led to the growth of a temperance movement. This reform effort urged people to use self-discipline to stop drinking hard liquor.
Reform Movements
Reform movements in America included religious meetings called revivals, where preachers urged huge crowds of people to seek salvation. The
temperance movement, an effort to convince people to avoid drinking alcohol, promoted posters like the one shown here.
How might the scenes in this poster encourage people to stop drinking?

Reformers asked people to limit themselves to beer and wine in small amounts. Groups like the American Temperance Society and the American Temperance Union helped to spread the message. Minister Lyman Beecher spoke widely about the evils of alcohol. He claimed that people who drank alcohol were "neglecting the education of their families— and corrupting their morals."
THE IMPACT
TODAY
McGuffey's Readers were among the first "graded" textbooks. Organizing classes by grades was a new idea that is standard practice today.
Prison Reform
Another target of reform was the prison system. Dorothea Dix was a middle-class reformer who visited prisons throughout Massachusetts beginning in 1841. Dix reported that mentally ill people frequently were jailed with criminals. They were sometimes left in dark cells without clothes or heat and were chained to the walls and beaten. Dix spoke of what she saw to the state legislature.
In response, the Massachusetts government built facilities for the mentally ill. Dix's work had a nationwide effect. Eventually, more than 100 state hospitals were built to give mentally ill people professional care.
Prisons also held runaway children and orphans. Some had survived only by begging or stealing, and they got the same punishment as adult criminals. Boston mayor Josiah Quincy asked that young offenders receive different punishments than adults. In the 1820s, several state and local governments founded reform schools for children who had been housed in prisons. There, children lived under strict rules and learned useful skills.
Some reformers also tried to end the overcrowding and cruel conditions in prisons. Their efforts led to the creation of houses of correction. These institutions did not use punishment alone to change behavior. They also offered prisoners education.
READING CHECK
Summarizing How did
reformers change the punishment of criminals?
Improvements in Education
Another challenge facing America in the early 1800s was poor public education. During this era, childhood was beginning to be viewed as a separate stage of life in which education was of the utmost importance in creating responsible citizens. However, many children worked in factories or on farms to help support their families. If children could read the Bible, write, and do simple math, that was often considered to be enough.
Education in the Early 1800s
The availability of education varied widely. New England had the most schools, while the South and West had the fewest. Few teachers were trained. Schoolhouses were small, and students of all ages and levels worked in one room.
McGuffey's Readers were the most popular textbooks. William Holmes McGuffey, an educator and minister, put selections from British and American literature in them as well as instruction in moral and social values.
Social background and wealth affected the quality of education. Rich families sent children to private schools or hired tutors. However, poor children had only public schools. Girls could go to school, but parents usually thought that girls needed little education and kept them home. Therefore, few girls learned to read.
Common-School Movement People in the common-school movement wanted all children taught in a common place, regardless of background. Horace Mann was a leader of this movement.
In 1837 Mann became Massachusetts's first secretary of education. He convinced the state to double its school budget and raise teachers' salaries. He lengthened the school year and began the first school for teacher training. Mann's success set a standard for education reform throughout the country.
450 CHAPTER 14
Women's Education
Education reform created greater opportunities for women. Catharine Beecher started an all-female academy in Hartford, Connecticut. The first college-level educational institution available to women was the Troy Female Seminary, opened by Emma Willard in 1821. Several other women's colleges opened during the 1830s, including Mount Holyoke College. The first medical college for women, who were barred from men's medical schools, opened in Boston in 1848.
Teaching People with Disabilities
Efforts to improve education also helped people with disabilities. In 1831 Samuel Gridley Howe opened the Perkins School for the Blind in Massachusetts. Howe traveled widely, talking about teaching people with visual impairment. Thomas Gallaudet improved the education and lives of people with hearing impairments. He founded the first free American school for hearing-impaired people in 1817.
Summarizing What were
Horace Mann's achievements?
Reading Check .
Horace Mann
1796-1859
Born in Franklin, Massachusetts, Mann had little schooling, but he educated himself well enough at the local library to get into Brown University and attend law school. Despite a busy law practice, he served in the Massachusetts legislature for 10 years. He was also an outspoken advocate for public education. In 1837
the state created the
post of secretary of
education for him. His
achievements in that office
made him famous. He later
served in the U.S. House of
Representatives and as president of Antioch College in Ohio. His influence on education is reflected by the fact that many American schools are named for him.
Analyzing Information How do you
think Mann's own education influenced his desire for public schools?
Primary Source
.....* • .. " '.. 1 .......................
SPEECH
Horace Mann to the Board of Education
In a speech to the newly created Massachusetts Board of Education, Horace Mann, the board's first secretary, described the purpose of the public school system.
//[T]here should be a free district school, sufficiently safe, and sufficiently good, for all of the children...where they may be well instructed in the rudiments [basics] of knowledge, formed to propriety of demeanor [good behavior], and imbued [filled] with the principles of duty... It is on this common platform, that a general acquaintanceship [friendship] should be formed between the children of the same neighborhood. It is here, that the affinities [qualities] of a common nature should unite them together/^
—Horace Mann, quoted in The Republic and the School, edited by Lawrence A. Cremin
j Mann believed all ; students should receive q free education.
1
< Neighborhood children i should attend school together ] to form a common bond.
ANALYSIS {■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■
SKILLi ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
Besides knowledge, what purpose did Mann believe the public schools had?
NEW MOVEMENTS IN AMERICA 41
African American
Communities
Free African Americans usually lived in segregated, or separate, communities in the North. Most of them lived in cities such as New York, Boston, and Philadelphia. Community leaders were often influenced by the Second Great Awakening and its spirit of reform.
Founded by former slave Richard Allen, the Free African Religious Society became a model for other groups that pressed for racial equality and the education of blacks. In 1816 Allen became the first bishop of the African Methodist Episcopal Church, or AME Church. This church broke away from white Methodist churches after African Americans were treated poorly in some white congregations.
Other influential African Americans of the time, such as Alexander Crummel, pushed for the creation of schools for black Americans. The New York African Free School in New York City educated hundreds of children, many of whom became brilliant scholars and impor-
tant African American leaders. Philadelphia also had a long history of educating African Americans. This was largely because Philadelphia was a center of Quaker influence, and the Quakers believed strongly in equality. The city ran seven schools for African American students by the year 1800. In 1820 Boston followed Philadelphia's lead and opened a separate elementary school for African American children. The city began allowing them to attend school with whites in 1855.
African Americans rarely attended college because few colleges would accept them. In 1835 Oberlin College became the first to do so. Harvard University soon admitted African Americans, too. Several African American colleges were founded beginning in the 1840s. In 1842 the Institute for Colored Youth opened in Philadelphia. Avery College, also in Pennsylvania, was founded in 1849.
While free African Americans had some opportunities to attend school in the North and Midwest, few had this chance in the South. Laws in the South barred most
452 CHAPTER 14
entialin calls for greater Integration?
enslaved people from getting any education, even at the primary school level. While some slaves learned to read on their own, they almost always did so in secret. Slaveholders were fearful that education and knowledge in general might encourage a spirit of revolt among enslaved African Americans.
READING CHECK
Drawing Conclusions
Why was it difficult for African Americans to get an education in the South in the early 1800s?
1 Summary and Preview The efforts of I reformers led to improvements in many
aspects of American life in the early to mid-1800s. In the next section you will learn about reform-minded people who opposed the practice of slavery.
Section 3 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com

Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What was the Second Great
Awakening, and who was one of its leaders? b. Summarize What effects did the Second Great Awakening have on religion in the United States?
I c. Explain How did the Second Great Awakening j relate to the basic right of freedom of religion?
I 2. a. Describe What role did Dorothea Dix play in | social reforms of the early 1800s?
1 b. Identify What views did temperance societies ' have on the social issues of the time? What changes j	did they bring about?
f c. Summarize What different reforms helped |	improve the U.S. prison	system?
;	d. Elaborate How might the	Second Great
f Awakening have led to the growth of social reform
I	movements?
3. a. Identify What was the common-school movement, and who was one of its leaders?
I
i b. Analyze Why did reformers set out to improve • education in the United States?
c. Evaluate Do you think Horace Mann's ideas for educational reform were good ones? Explain.
4. a. Recall In what cities were the first public schools for African Americans located?
b. Draw Conclusions How did free African Americans benefit from educational reforms?
Critical Thinking
5. Categorizing Review the reform-movement events on the time line in your notes. Then use a chart like the one below to identify the leaders and accomplishments of each reform movement.
Movement	Leaders	Accomplishments
Prison and Mental Health Reform		
Temperance		
Education		
"^WriteSmart
6. Choosing Important Events This section covers the reform of social issues such as religion, prisons, and education. Write the reforms described in your chart.Then write a note about each reform and about the important people involved in it.Think about how each one influenced life in the United States.
NEW MOVEMENTS IN AMERICA 4
SECTION
TEKS 1A,7B,7D,19A,20C,
T\k,22$f23C,23l,24kr24ft TnhwB AAovcMRiont to End Slavery
What You Will Learn...
1.	Americans from a variety of backgrounds actively opposed slavery.
2.	Abolitionists organized the Underground Railroad to help enslaved Africans escape.
3.	Despite efforts of abolitionists, many Americans remained opposed to ending slavery.
If YOU were there...
You live in southern Ohio in the 1850s. A friend who lives across the river in Kentucky has asked you to join a network that helps escaping slaves. She reminds you that your house has a secret cellar where you could easily hide fugitives for a few days. You are opposed to slavery. But you know this might get you in trouble with your neighbors—and with the law.
Would you become an agent for the Underground Railroad? Why?
In the mid-1800s, debate over slavery increased as abolitionists organized to challenge slavery in the United States.
Key Terms and People
abolition, p. 454
William Lloyd Garrison, p. 455 American Anti-Slavery
Society, p. 455
Angelina and Sarah Grimke, p. 455 Frederick Douglass, p. 456 Sojourner Truth, p. 456 Underground Railroad, p. 456 Harriet Tubman, p. 458
hmhsocialstudies.com
RS.Ig’i.lffiB,,,-....j
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the different abolitionist movements that existed, the leaders of each movement, and the methods each used.
I BUILDING BACKGROUND
The early 1800s brought many I movements for social reform in the United States. Perhaps the most . important and far-reaching was the movement for the abolition of
slavery. While reformers worked to end slavery, many also took risks to ; help slaves to escape.	j
Americans Oppose Slavery
Some Americans had opposed slavery since before the country was founded. Benjamin Franklin was the president of the first antislavery society in America, the Pennsylvania Society for Promoting the Abolition of Slavery. In the 1830s, Americans took more organized action supporting abolition, or a complete end to slavery. Differences among Abolitionists
Abolitionists came from many different backgrounds and opposed slavery for various reasons. The Quakers were among the first groups to challenge slavery on religious grounds. Other religious leaders gave speeches and published pamphlets that moved many Americans to support abolition. In one of these, abolitionist Theodore Weld wrote that "everyman knows that slavery is a curse." Other abolitionists referred to the Declaration of Independence. They reminded people that the American Revolution had been fought in the name of liberty and other "unalienable rights."
454 CHAPTER 14
Antislavery reformers did not always agree on the details, however. They differed over how much equality they thought African Americans should have. Some believed that African Americans should receive the same treatment as white Americans. In contrast, other abolitionists were against full political and social equality.
Some abolitionists wanted to send freed African Americans to Africa to start new colonies. They thought that this would prevent conflicts between the races in the United States. In 1817 a minister named Robert Finley started the American Colonization Society, an organization dedicated to establishing colonies of freed slaves in Africa. Five years later, the society founded the colony of Liberia on the west coast of Africa. About 12,000 African Americans eventually settled in Liberia. However, many abolitionists who once favored colonization later opposed it. Some African Americans also opposed it. David Walker was one such person. In his 1829 essay, Appeal to the Colored Citizens of the World, Walker explained his opposition to colonization.
^The greatest riches in all America have arisen from our blood and tears: and they [whites] will drive us from our property and homes, which we have earned with our blood/'
—David Walker, quoted in From Slavery to Freedom by John Hope Franklin and Alfred A. Moss Jr.
Spreading the Abolitionist Message
Abolitionists found many ways to further their cause. Some went on speaking tours or wrote pamphlets and newspaper articles. John Greenleaf Whittier wrote abolitionist poetry and literature. William Lloyd Garrison published an abolitionist newspaper, the Liberator, beginning in 1831. In 1833 he also helped found the American Anti-Slavery Society. Its members wanted immediate emancipation and racial equality for African Americans. Garrison later became its president.
Both the Liberator and the Anti-Slavery Society relied on support from free African Americans. Society members spread
Where there is a
human being,
see God-given rights ..
a
antislavery literature and petitioned Congress to end federal support of slavery. In 1840 the American Anti-Slavery Society split. One group wanted immediate freedom for enslaved African Americans and a bigger role for women. The others wanted gradual emancipation and for women to play only minor roles in the movement.
Angelina and Sarah Grimke, two white southern women, were antislavery activists of the 1830s. They came from a South Carolina slaveholding family but disagreed with their parents' support of slavery. Angelina Grimke tried to recruit other white southern women in a pamphlet called Appeal to the Christian Women of the South in 1836.
** I know you do not make the laws, but... if you really suppose you can do nothing to overthrow slavery you are greatly mistaken.. .Try to persuade your husband, father, brothers, and sons that slavery is a crime against God and man."
—Angelina Grimke, quoted in The Grimke Sisters from South Carolina, edited by Gerda Lerner
This essay was very popular in the North. In 1839 the Grimke sisters wrote American Slavery As It Is. The book was one of the most important antislavery works of its time.
NEW MOVEMENTS IN AMERICA
African American Abolitionists
Many former slaves were active in the antislavery cause. Frederick Douglass escaped from slavery when he was 20 and went on to become one of the most important African American leaders of the 1800s. Douglass secretly learned to read and write as a boy, despite a law against it. His public-speaking skills impressed members of the Anti-Slavery Society. In 1841 they asked him to give regular lectures.
At a Fourth of July celebration in 1852, he captured the audience's attention with his powerful voice.
^The blessings in which you, this day, rejoice, are not enjoyed in common.. .This Fourth of July is yours, not mine. You may rejoice, I must mourn/'
—Frederick Douglass, quoted in From Slavery to Freedom by John Hope Franklin and Alfred A. Moss Jr.
In addition to his many speaking tours in the United States and Europe, Douglass published a newspaper called the North Star and wrote several autobiographies. His autobiographies were intended to show the injustices of slavery.
Another former slave, Sojourner Truth, also contributed to the abolitionist cause. She claimed God had called her to travel through the United States and preach the truth about slavery and women's rights. With her deep voice and quick wit, Truth became legendary in the antislavery movement for her fiery and dramatic speeches.
Other African Americans wrote narratives about their experiences as slaves to expose the cruelties that many slaves faced. In 1861 Harriet Jacobs published Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, one of the few slave narratives by a woman. William Wells Brown wrote an antislavery play as well as a personal narrative in the form of a novel called Clotel.
Finding Main Ideas In what
ways did African Americans participate in the abolition movement?
READING CHECK ,
The Underground Railroad
By the 1830s, a loosely organized group had begun helping slaves escape from the South. Free African Americans, former slaves, and a few white abolitionists worked together. They created what became known as the Underground Railroad. The organization was not an actual railroad but was a network of people who arranged transportation and hiding places for fugitives, or escaped slaves.
Fugitives would travel along "freedom trails" that led them to northern states or sometimes into Canada. At no time did the Railroad have a central leadership. No one person, or group of people, was ever officially in charge. Despite the lack of any real structure, the Underground Railroad managed to achieve dramatic results.
Often wearing disguises, fugitives moved along the "railroad" at night, led by people known as conductors. Many times, the fugitives had no other guideposts but the stars. They stopped to rest during the day at "stations," often bams, attics, or other places on property owned by abolitionists known as station masters.
The station masters hid and fed the fugitives.
Harriet Tubman was a courageous conductor on the Underground Railroad.
456 CHAPTER 14


r‘W"
The Underground Railroad

CANADA
Enslaved African Americans followed many routes to escape from southern slavery. Once in the free states, however, fugitive slaves could not be certain of their freedom. U.S. law still considered them as property, and bounty hunters were paid to capture and return any fugitive slaves they found.
lllll
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
fxfi
Fugitive slaves hid behind a secret door in this Indiana house on the Underground Railroad.
Free states
Slave states

Routes of the * Underground Railroad 75	150 Miles
0	75	150 Kilometers
^0'

k
GEOGRAPHY
SKILLS) INTERPRETING MAPS
»

This painting, A Ride for Liberty—The Fugitive Slaves by Eastman Johnson, shows an African American family riding toward freedom.
1.	Place Which northern cities were destinations for escaped slaves?
2.	Movement Which rivers were routes for the Underground Railroad?
Primary Source
HANDBILL
Anti-Abolitionist
Rally
Members of an anti-abolitionist group used this flyer to call people together in order to disrupt a meeting of abolitionists in 1837.
Seditious means "guilty of rebelling against lawful authority."
OUTRAGE,
Fellow Citizen*,
A A
TtKOklTIOYIMI*
of the most revolting character is among yon, exciting the feel« tIie Worth against the South. A seditious Lecture is to
he delivered	■	■ ■ -
THIS EVENING,
at y o’clock, at the Presbyterian Church in Cannon-street, j °. are re<luest<‘<1 to attend and unite in putting down and
siiencingby peaceable means this tool of evil and fanaticism. J" , ket the rights of the States guaranteed by the Constitution
1 feb. at, 1837,	Union forever!
Ik
The group believes abolition violates the Constitution.
analysis
SKILL I
analyzing primary Sources What emotional language does this handbill use to get its message across?
The most famous and daring conductor on the Underground Railroad was Harriet Tubman. When Tubman escaped slavery in 1849, she left behind her family. She swore that she would return and lead her whole family to freedom in the North. Tubman returned to the South 19 times, successfully leading her family and more than 300 other slaves to freedom. At one time the reward for Tubman's capture reportedly climbed to $40,000, a huge amount of money at that time.
Reading Check
_______________ Drawing Inferences
Why were the operations of the Underground Railroad kept secret?
Opposition to Ending Slavery
Although the North was the center of the abolitionist movement, many white northerners agreed with the South and supported slavery. Others disliked slavery but opposed equality for African Americans.
Newspaper editors and politicians warned that freed slaves would move north and take jobs from white workers. Some workers feared
losing jobs to newly freed African Americans, whom they believed would accept lower wages. Abolitionist leaders were threatened with violence as some northerners joined mobs. Such a mob killed abolitionist Elijah Lovejoy in 1837 in Alton, Illinois.
The federal government also obstructed abolitionists. Between 1836 and 1844, the U.S. House of Representatives used what was called a gag rule. Congress had received thousands of antislavery petitions. Yet the gag rule forbade members of Congress from discussing them. This rule violated the First Amendment right of citizens to petition the government. But southern members of Congress did not want to debate slavery. Many northern members of Congress preferred to avoid the issue.
Eventually, representative and former president John Quincy Adams was able to get the gag rule overturned. His resolution to enact a constitutional amendment halting the expansion of slavery never passed, however.
Many white southerners saw slavery as vital to the South's economy and culture. They also felt that outsiders should not
458 CHAPTER 14
Sojourner Truth was a former slave who became a leading abolitionist.
-
***
interfere with their way of life. After Nat Turner's Rebellion in 1831, when Turner led some slaves to kill slaveholders, open talk about slavery disappeared in the South. It became dangerous to voice antislavery sentiments in southern states. Abolitionists like the Grimke sisters left rather than air unpopular views to hostile neighbors. Racism, fear, and economic dependence on slavery made emancipation all but impossible in the South.
READING CHECK
Drawing Conclusions
Why did many northern workers oppose the abolition movement?
<-

Summary and preview The issue of slavery grew more controversial in the United States during the first half of the nineteenth century. In the next section you will learn about women's rights.
Section 4 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
ONLINE QUIZ
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What contributions did William Lloyd Garrison make to the abolition movement?
f b. Draw Conclusions In what ways did contribu-t tions from African Americans aid the struggle for |	abolition?
j c. Elaborate What do you think about the {	American Colonization Society's plan to return
free African Americans to Liberia?
2.	a. Describe How did the Underground Railroad
work?
b.	Explain Why did Harriet Tubman first become involved with the Underground Railroad?
c.	Evaluate Do you think the Underground Railroad was a success? Why or why not?
3.	a. Describe What action did Congress take to block abolitionists? What action did John Quincy Adams take to support abolition?
b. Analyze Why did some Americans oppose equality for African Americans?
c. Predict How did southerners'views of slavery reflect the idea of states' rights? How might the debate over slavery lead to conflict in the future?
Critical Thinking
4. Identifying Cause and Effect Review your notes on the abolitionist movement. Then use a graphic organizer like the one below to show the reasons for opposition to the movement and the effects of that opposition.
Reasons for Opposing the End of Slavery	J Effects of Opposition K | to the Movement
	1—d
5. Describing Abolition Add notes about the abolitionist movement and its leaders to your chart. Be sure to note how abolitionists influenced life in the United States. What were they fighting for? Who opposed them, and why?
NEW MOVEMENTS IN AMERICA 4
Fvl
r
History and Geography
African




aa
B9r

■" txn United
r I

Ml



Free Blacks in the North Slavery had been allowed in the northern colonies, but by 1804 the last northern state had abolished the practice. Free African Americans in the North, however, experienced racism and social and economic segregation.
Free blacks had some access to formal education, especially in the cities, but were barred from most white schools. Often, they created their own towns and communities that provided their own jobs, goods, churches, and services. While they were legally able to participate in the political life of the North, few of them gained political influence.
will

The experiences of African Americans in the North and in the South were drastically different. Although there were free blacks in the South, their lives were overshadowed by the slavery in the region. Each of these three groups—slaves, free blacks in the North, and free blacks in the South—had different economic, social, and political lives.


' at&

America's Population, 1830
1%
1
2%
1

Population of North
iit-
i&3U
X

J		k
r 35°/	62°/	1 °	I
		w
White Free Black Other
Population of South
White
Enslaved Black Free Black Other
Source Historical Statistics of the United States
lW»A i
Slaves in the South Almost all African Americans in the South were slaves. Their labor was crucial to the agricultural economy of the region. Their daily activities were dictated by owners, but their food, music, and spirituality showed influences of their ancestors'African origins. They were given no voice in the government of the region, and numerous laws restricted their freedom. RRI
□ Slave state m Free state [. , | U.S. territories |	; Republic of Texas
■h Mason-Dixon Line 0	150	300 Miles
150	300 Kilometers

r W A . 1
Sfi

GEOGRAPHY
SKILLS! INTERPRETING MAPS
1. Movement Why did some free blacks stay in the South?
' 1 2. Location Which region had the most African Americans?
Free Blacks in the South Free blacks in the South struggled with extreme racism, but sometimes owned businesses or farms. Even in the cities, their access to education and opportunities were limited. Former slaves often left the region, but many more stayed in the South. Sometimes this was because of family ties or because their former owners gave them land upon freeing them.
More free blacks lived in the South than in the North, but those that were former slaves often left the region. Southern states had many laws that limited the lives and opportunities of free blacks, including access to political power. As in the North, they often formed their own communities and neighborhoods.
1

Frederick Douglass
As a freed slave, how would you help people still enslaved?
When did he live? 1817-1895
Where did he live? Frederick Douglass was bom in rural Maryland. At age six he was sent to live in Baltimore, and at age 20 he escaped to New York City. For most of his life, Douglass lived in Rochester, New York, making his home into a stop along the Underground Railroad. He traveled often, giving powerful antislavery speeches to audiences throughout the North and in Europe.
KEY EVENTS
<> 1817 Born a slave in Maryland
<11837 Escapes slavery disguised as a sailor
0 1841 Begins his career as a speaker on abolition
01845 Writes Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, his first autobiography
1847 Publishes first issue of the North Star
1863 Meets President Lincoln and becomes an adviser
1889 Named American consul general to Haiti
1895 Dies in Washington, D.C.
What did he do? After hearing the abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison speak in 1841, Douglass began his own speaking tours about his experiences as a slave. In midlife he wrote an autobiography and started an abolitionist newspaper called the North Star. During the Civil War, Douglass persuaded black soldiers to fight for the North.
lA/oiHGri's Rights
If YOU were there...
You are a schoolteacher in New York State in 1848. Although you earn a small salary, you still live at home. Your father does not believe that unmarried women should live alone or look after their own money. One day in a shop, you see a poster about a public meeting to discuss women's rights. You know your father will be angry if you go to the meeting. But you are very curious.
TEKS 1A,21AZ22BZ23EZ24B
What You Will Learn...
■B8I
Would you attend the meeting? Why?
I BUILDING BACKGROUND
Women were active in the movements I to reform prisons and schools. They fought for temperance and worked for abolition. But with all their work for social change, women still lacked many rights and opportunities of their own. Throughout the 1800s, the women's rights movement gradually became stronger and more organized.
1.	Influenced by the abolition movement, many women struggled to gain equal rights for themselves.
2.	Calls for women's rights met opposition from men and women.
3.	The Seneca Falls Convention launched the first organized women's rights movement
in the United States.
Reformers sought to improve women's rights in American society.
V
Women's Struggle for Equal Rights
Fighting for the rights of African Americans led many female abolitionists to fight for women's rights. In the mid-1800s, these women found that they had to defend their right to speak in public, particularly when a woman addressed both men and women. For example, members of the press, the clergy, and even some male abolitionists criticized the Grimke sisters. These critics thought that the sisters should not give public speeches. They did not want women to leave their traditional female roles. The Grimkes protested that women had a moral duty to lead the antislavery movement.
Early Writings for Women's Rights
In 1838 Sarah Grimke published a pamphlet arguing for equal rights for women. She titled it Letters on the Equality of the Sexes and the Condition of Women.
** I ask no favors for my sex... All I ask our brethren [brothers] is that they will take their feet from off our necks, and permit us to stand upright on that ground which God designed us to occupy
—Sarah Grimke, quoted in The Grimke Sisters from South Carolina, edited by Gerda Lerner
Key Terms and People
Elizabeth Cady Stanton, p. 464 Lucretia Mott, p. 464 Seneca Falls Convention, p. 464 Declaration of Sentiments, p. 464 Lucy Stone, p. 465 Susan B. Anthony, p. 465
hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to show some of the significant events in the struggle for women's rights.
W MOVEMENTS IN AMERICA 4C
Sarah Grimke also argued for equal educational opportunities. She pointed out laws that negatively affected women. In addition, she demanded equal pay for equal work.
Sarah Grimke never married. She explained that the laws of the day gave a husband complete control of his wife's property. Therefore, she feared that by marrying, she would become more like a slave than a wife. Her sister, Angelina, did marry, but she refused to promise to obey her husband during their marriage ceremony. She married Theodore Weld, an abolitionist. Weld agreed to give up his legal right to control her property after they married. For the Grimkes, the abolitionist principles and women's rights principles were identical.
In 1845 the famous transcendental-ist Margaret Fuller published Woman in the Nineteenth Century. This book used well-known sayings to explain the role of women in American society. Fuller used democratic and transcendentalist principles to stress the importance of individualism to all people, especially women. The book influenced many leaders of the women's rights movement.
Sojourner Truth
Sojourner Truth was another powerful supporter of both abolition and women's rights.
She had been bom into slavery in about 1797. Her birth name was Isabella Baumfree. She took the name Sojourner Truth because she felt that her mission was to be a sojourner, or traveler, and spread the truth. Though she never learned to read or write, she impressed many well-educated people. One person who thought highly of her was the author Harriet Beecher Stowe. Stowe said that she had never spoken "with anyone who had more ... personal presence than this woman." Truth stood six feet tall and was a confident speaker.
In 1851 Truth gave a speech that is often quoted to this day.
"That man over here says that women need to be helped into carriages and lifted over ditches, and to have the best place everywhere. Nobody ever helps me into carriages or over mud puddles, or gives me any best place... Look at me! I have ploughed and planted and... no man could head [outwork] me. And ain't I a woman?"
—Sojourner Truth, quoted in A History of Women in America by Carol Hymowitzand Michaele Weissman
Truth, the Grimke sisters, and other supporters of the women's movement were determined to be heard.
READING CHECK
Drawing Inferences
Why would reformers link the issues of abolition and women's rights?
Time Line
Women's Rights
1776 Abigail Adams asks her husband, John Adams, to "remember the ladies" and their rights in the Declaration of Independence.
462 CHAPTER 14
Opposing the Call for Women's Rights
Publications about women's rights first appeared in the United States shortly after the American Revolution. However, women's concerns did not become a national issue with strong opposition for many more years.
The Movement Grows
The change took place when women took a more active and leading role in reform and abolition. Other social changes also led to the rise of the women's movement. Women took advantage of better educational opportunities in the early 1800s. Their efforts on behalf of reform groups helped them leam how to organize more effectively and to work together.
Another benefit of reform-group work was that some men began to fight for women's rights. Many activists, both men and women, found it unacceptable that women were not allowed to vote or sit on juries. They were also upset that married women in many states had little or no control over their own property.
Opposition to Women's Rights
Like the abolitionist movement, the struggle for women's rights faced opposition. Many people did not agree with some of the goals of
READING CHECK
the women's rights movement. Some women believed that they did not need new rights. They said that women were not unequal to men, only different. Some critics believed that women should not try to work in public for social changes. Women were welcome to work for social change, but only from within their homes. "Let her not look away from her own little family circle for the means of producing moral and social reforms," wrote T. S. Arthur. His advice appeared in a popular women's magazine called The Lady at Home.
Some people also thought that women lacked the physical or mental strength to survive without men's protection. They believed that a woman should go from the protection of her father's home to that of her husband's. They also thought that women could not cope with the outside world; therefore, a husband should control his wife's property. Despite opposition, women continued to pursue their goal of greater rights.
Drawing Conclusions
Why did some men and women think that the women's rights movement was misguided?

Primary Source
f................. .........- -.......
f HISTORIC DOCUMENT
Declaration of | Sentiments
At the 1848 Seneca Falls Convention, 100 people signed the Declaration of Sentiments, a document declaring the rights of women. The wording of the document purposely echoed the
■ Declaration of Independence.
|i The authors use the same words that are in the Declaration of Independence, but include women.
We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men ar>d women are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable1 rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; that to secure these rights governments are instituted, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed. Whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the right of those who suffer from it to refuse allegiance2 to it, and to 'ns‘st uPQn ^e institution of a new government, lay-ing its foundation on such principles, and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness.
1. inalienable not able to be taken away 2. allegiance loyalty
Here the women demand that they become a part of government.
analysis
SKILL
Analyzing Primary sources Why would women want to use the Declaration of Independence as a source for their own declaration?
Seneca Falls Convention
In 1840 Elizabeth Cady Stanton attended the World's Anti-Slavery Convention in London, England, while on her honeymoon. She discovered that, unlike her husband, she was not allowed to participate. All women in attendance had to sit behind a curtain in a separate gallery of the convention hall. William Lloyd Garrison, who had helped found the American Anti-Slavery Society, sat with them in protest.
The treatment of women abolitionists at the convention angered Stanton and her new friend, Lucretia Mott. Apparently, even many abolitionists did not think that women were equal to men. Stanton and Mott wanted to change this, so they planned to "form a society to advance the rights of women." Eight years passed before Stanton and Mott finally announced the Seneca Falls Convention, the first public meeting about women's rights held in the United States. It opened on July 19,1848, in Seneca Falls, New York.
Declaration of Sentiments
The convention organizers wrote a Declaration of Sentiments. This document detailed beliefs about social injustice toward women. They used the Declaration of Independence as the basis for the language for their Declaration of Sentiments. The authors included 18 charges against men—the same number that had been charged against King George III. The Declaration of Sentiments was signed by some 100 people.
About 240 people attended the Seneca Falls Convention, including men such as abolitionist Frederick Douglass. Many other reformers who also worked in the temperance and abolition movements were present. Several women who participated in the convention worked in nearby factories. One of them, 19-year-old Charlotte Woodward, signed the Declaration of Sentiments. She worked long hours in a factory, making gloves. Her wages were very low, and she could not even keep her earnings. She had to turn her wages over to her father.
464 CHAPTER 14
Women's Rights Leaders
After the convention, the struggle continued. Women's rights activists battled many difficulties and much opposition. Still, they kept working to obtain greater equality for women. Among the many women working for women's rights, three became important leaders: Lucy Stone, Susan B. Anthony, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton. Each brought different strengths to the fight for women's rights.
Lucy Stone was a well-known spokesperson for the Anti-Slavery Society. In the early years of the women's rights movement, Stone became known as a gifted speaker. Elizabeth Cady Stanton called her "the first who really stirred the nation's heart on the subject of women's wrongs."
Susan B. Anthony brought strong organizational skills to the women's rights movement. She did much to turn the fight for
women's rights into a political movement. Anthony argued that women and men should receive equal pay for equal work. She also believed that women should be allowed to enter traditionally male professions, such as religion and law. Anthony was especially concerned with laws that affected women's control of money and property.
Anthony led a campaign to change laws regarding the property rights of women. She wrote in her diary that no woman could ever be free without "a purse of her own." After forming a network to cover the entire state of New York, she collected more than 6,000 signatures to petition for a new property-rights law. In 1860, due largely to the efforts of Anthony, New York finally gave married women ownership of their wages and property. Other states in the Northeast and Midwest soon created similar laws.
THE IMPACT
TODAY
In the United States, as of the year 2011, women earned about 82 percent as much as men did.
NEW MOVEMENTS IN AMERICA 4<
Elizabeth Cady Stanton wrote many of the documents and speeches of the movement, which were often delivered by Anthony. Stanton was a founder and important leader of the National Woman Suffrage Association. This organization was considered one of the more radical groups because of its position that abolition was not a more important cause than women's rights.
Not every battle was won. Other major reforms, such as women's right to vote, were not achieved at this time. Still, more women than ever before became actively involved in women's rights issues. This increased activity was one of the movement's greatest accomplishments.
Reading Check .
Identifying Points of View
What did Susan B. Anthony mean when she said that no woman could be free without "a purse of her own"?
Lucy Stone worked for equal rights for women and African Americans.
I
Summary and Preview women s rights I became a major issue in the mid-1800s, as women began to demand a greater degree of equality. In the next chapter you will read about western expansion.
Section 5 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
l-J
NLINE QUI
Reviewing ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What role did Sojourner Truth play in both the abolition and women's rights movements?
b. Analyze How did women's experiences in the abolition movement lead them to demand equal rights?
2.	a. Identify What limitations on women's rights did many activists find unacceptable?
b.	Summarize Why did many Americans oppose equal rights for women?
c.	Elaborate What arguments might you use to counter the arguments of men and women who opposed equal rights for women?
3.	a. Recall Who were the three main leaders of the women's rights movement, and how did they each contribute to the movement?
b.	Draw Conclusions Why might working-class women like Charlotte Woodward have supported the Seneca Falls Convention and the Declaration of Sentiments?
c.	Evaluate Do you agree with Susan B. Anthony that women should receive equal pay for equal work? Explain your answer.
Critical Thinking
4.	Analyzing Review your notes on events in the women's rights movement. Then copy the graphic organizer shown below and use it to show the goals of the movement, as well as the arguments against it.
Goals	Opponents' Arguments
	
myWriteSmart
5. Describing Women's Suffrage Add notes about the women's suffrage movement to your chart. Note important leaders and describe what they were fighting for. Ask yourself, "How did the women's suffrage movement change life in the United States?"
466 CHAPTER 14
*
Elizabeth Cady Stanton
What steps would you take to bring about nationwide change?
When did she live? 1815-1902
Where did she live? Elizabeth Cady Stanton was born in Johnstown, New York. She married a prominent abolitionist and settled in Seneca Falls, New York, where she had seven children. Later in life she traveled widely, giving lectures and speeches across the country.
What did she do? Stanton and fellow activist Lucretia Mott organized the nation's first women's rights convention, at Seneca Falls in 1848. She and Susan B. Anthony founded the National Woman Suffrage Association
in 1869. For nearly six decades, she spoke and wrote passionately about women's rights.
KEY EVENTS
Ills
Why is she important? Stanton helped author the Declaration of Sentiments, which demanded equal rights for women, including the right to vote. A brilliant speaker and debater, Stanton spoke out against laws that kept married women from owning property, earning wages, and
keeping custody of their children.
Finding Main Ideas What problems did Stanton try to correct? What problems did she face in accomplishing
her goals?
1815 Born in Johnstown, New York
1840 Meets Lucretia Mott at the World's Anti-Slavery Convention, where they are barred from participating
1848 Helps organize the first national meeting of women's suffrage reformers at Seneca Falls,
New York
1851 Meets Susan B. Anthony, with whom she will later lead the National Woman Suffrage Association
1895 Publishes the Woman's Bible
1902 Dies in New York City
Elizabeth Cady Stanton helped author the Declaration of Sentiments at the Seneca Falls Convention.
Abmmkk Dowlass, Amt p:;s- Catbar»s unanimously adopted, as follows :
declaration OF SENTIMENTS.
u rro,n'»|.a«
_	dm uite Ut winch the
mourn', t '„<} <
w,; W,| lnithi !l(,	...
8‘	.< mid v, in, „	.	• / “'“t
h„d \	:!! :i;.	...t, if:.'
I-,.., . <•!, f. il(s uro if.s.ft, :t...	.;r'
in	Lounhe CLhy m of ur cue 1
N LH I
bn , 4
rdh r I
n h to rcfpyy
ocial Studies Skills
Analysis Critical Thinking	Civic
Participation
Study
r
Accepting Social Responsibility
Define the Skill
A society is an organized group of people who share a common set of activities, traditions, and goals. You are part of many societies—your school, community, and nation are just three. Every society's strength depends on the support and contributions of its members. Social responsibility is the obligation that every person has to the societies in which he or she is a member.
Learn the Skill
As a part of your school, community, and nation, you have obligations to the people around you.
The most obvious is to do nothing to harm your society. You also have a duty to be part of it. At the very least, this means exercising the rights and responsibilities of membership. These include being informed about issues in your society.
Another level of social responsibility is support of change to benefit society. This level of involvement goes beyond being informed about issues to trying to do something about them. If you take this important step, here are some points to consider.
1.	Few efforts to change society have everyone's support. Some people will want things to stay the same. They may treat you badly if you work for change. You must be prepared for this possibility if you decide to take action.
2.	Sometimes efforts to improve things involve opposing laws or rules that need to be changed. No matter how just your cause is, if you break law or rules, you must be willing to accept the consequences of your behavior.
3.	Remember that violence is never an acceptable method for change. People who use force in seeking change are not behaving in a socially responsible manner, even if their cause is good.
This chapter was filled with the stories of socially responsible people. Many of them devoted their lives to changing society for the better. Some did so at great personal risk. Boston abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison barely escaped with his life from a local mob that tried to lynch him because of his views.
Garrison and the other reformers you read about demonstrated the highest level of social responsibility. They saw an issue they believed to be a problem in society, and they worked tirelessly to change it and make society better.
Practice the Skill
Review the "If you were there" scene on page 454. Imagine yourself as that Ohioan. You believe slavery to be wrong. However, you also respect the law, and it is illegal to help an escaped slave. In addition, you know that most of your neighbors do not feel as you do about slavery. They might harm you or your property if you take this stand against it.
1.	Would agreeing to your friend's request help benefit society? Explain why or why not.
2.	Are you willing to risk the anger of your neighbors? Why or why not?
3.	Is the idea of breaking the law or possibly going to jail a factor in your decision? Explain.
4.	Would agreeing to your friend's request be a socially responsible thing to do? Explain why or why not.
468 CHAPTER 14
CHAPTER
Chapter Review
Visual Summary
Reviewing Vocabulary,
Terms, and People
1.	Which of the following authors wrote about Puritan life in The Scarlet Letter?
a.	Emily Dickinson c. Thomas Gallaudet
b.	Herman Melville d. Nathaniel Hawthorne
2.	Which document expressed the complaints of supporters of women's rights?
a.	Declaration of the c. Letters on
Rights of Women	Women's Rights
b.	Declaration of d. Seneca Falls
Sentiments	Convention
3.	As leader of the common-school movement, who worked to improve free public education?
a.	Walt Whitman c. Lyman Beecher
b.	Horace Mann d. Sojourner Truth
Comprehension and
Critical Thinking
SECTION 1 (Pages 438-442)
4.	a. Describe How did Irish and German immigrants interact with the environments they found when they reached the United States?
b.	Identify What political party was founded by nativists, and what policies did it support?
c.	Explain What conflicts arose in the cities? How were the conflicts between immigrants and nativists resolved?
d.	Analyze What factors caused U.S. cities to grow so fast?
e.	Evaluate Do you think that the benefits of city life outweighed its drawbacks? Explain.
SECTION 2 (Pages 443-445)
5.	a. Describe Who were some important transcen-dentalists, and what ideas did they promote?
b. Compare and Contrast In what ways were transcendentalists and Romantics similar and different?
NEW MOVEMENTS IN AMERICA 4<
c.	Elaborate Which movement appeals to you more—American transcendentalism or Romanticism? Why?
SECTION 3 (Pages 448-453)
6.	a. Identify What important reform movements became popular in the early 1800s?
b.	Analyze Why did education become an important topic for reformers in the 1800s? What changes were made?
c.	Predict How would the changes made to the care of the disabled change society?
d.	Evaluate Which reform movement do you think had the greatest effect on the United States? Why?
SECTION 4 (Pages 454-459)
7.	a. Recall What are the different reasons why people supported abolition?
b.	Describe What contributions did Frederick Douglass make in the abolition movement?
c.	Make Inferences How did northerners and southerners differ in their opposition to abolition?
d.	Evaluate Which of the methods used by abolitionists to oppose slavery do you think was most successful? Why?
SECTION 5 (Pages 461-466)
8.	a. Recall What led many women to question their place in American society?
b.	Make Inferences Why did female ractory workers like Charlotte Woodward support the women's rights movement?
c.	Evaluate By 1860 do you think the women's movement had been successful? Explain your answer.
Using the Internet
9.	Activity: Creating Visuals The Liberator and North Star were two newspapers that encouraged
the end of slavery. Through your online book, research the influence of abolitionist newspapers, such as those written by William Lloyd Garrison and Frederick Douglass. Then create a visual display that illustrates how each newspaper represented the abolitionist point of view.
Reading Skills
Recognizing Implied Main Ideas Use the Reading Skills taught in this chapter to answer the question below.
10.	Choose three paragraphs from the chapter.
Write a sentence explaining the main idea of each paragraph.
Reviewing Themes
11.	Society and Culture When was the era of reform movements? List three causes and three effects of reform movements of this era. Make an absolute and a relative chronology of the reformers in the chapter and their contributions.
12.	Society and Culture What similarities and differences were there between the lives of slaves, free blacks in the South, and free blacks in the North? Compare the effects of politics, the economy, and society on each group.
13.	Science and Technology What effects did scientific and technological advances have on life in the United States?
14.	Society and Culture What groups worked for social reform? What were their views of social issues and how did they work to change society?
Social Studies Skills
Accepting Social Responsibility Use the Social Studies Skills taught in this chapter to fill in the chart below.
Action	Is it socially responsible?	Why or why not?
Removing litter from a park		
Voting		
Reading a political magazine		
Running a red light		
"’^WriteSmart
16. Writing Your Persuasive Letter and Speech You've described a number of important events and political, religious, and artistic movements in your notebook. Choose the one you consider most important. Think about how it changed life in the United States. Then write a two-paragraph persuasive letter to the newspaper, arguing for the event or movement you chose.
yl hmhsocialstudies.com!
470
CHAPTER
Texas Test Practice
DIRECTIONS:
Read each question and write the letter of the best response. 1	A potato blight in Europe brought a large number of immigrants to the United States who were
A
Jewish. B
German. C
Irish. D
Protestant. 2	The author of “The Raven” was
F
James Fenimore Cooper. G
Edgar Allan Poe. H
Walt Whitman. J
Emily Dickinson. 3	The most famous leader of the Underground Railroad was
A
Frederick Douglass. B
Harriet Tubman. C
William Lloyd Garrison. D
Harriet Beecher Stowe. 4	African American students in the North
F had less opportunity for education than those in the South.
G did not benefit from educational reforms.
H had opportunities to attend black colleges
formed in the 1840s.
J usually attended the same schools as white students.
5	The temperance movement, efforts at prison reform, and the abolition movement were all elements of
A social reforms of the mid-1800s.
B the Second Great Awakening.
C transcendentalism.
D the women’s rights movement.
6	Which of the following people would most likely have supported a law prohibiting foreigners from holding public office?
F an antisuffragist G anativist H an abolitionist J a transcendentalist
7	Examine the following cartoon about women breaking kegs of liquor and then use it to answer the question below.
Document-Based Question What does the shield of the woman on horseback represent? How can you tell?
NEW MOVEMENTS IN AMERICA 4
Essential Question
How did the issue of slavery affect politics in the United States?
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS)
A, 5C, 6D, 7B, 7C, 7D, 8A, 8B, 10A, 17B, 18C, 21 A, 22A, 24A, 26A, 26B
SECTION 1: The Debate over Slavery.........................476
The Big Idea Antislavery literature and the annexation of new lands intensified the debate over slavery.
SECTION 2: Trouble in Kansas...............................483
The Big Idea The Kansas-Nebraska Act heightened tensions in the conflict over slavery.
SECTION 3: Political Divisions.............................488
The Big Idea The split over the issue of slavery intensified due to political division and judicial decisions.
SECTION 4: The Nation Divides..............................493
The Big Idea The United States broke apart due to the growing conflict over slavery.
Writing an Autobiographical Sketch When you read about history, it can be difficult to imagine how the events you read about affected ordinary people. In this chapter you will read about slavery in the United States. Then you will write an autobiography of a fictional character, telling how these events affected him or her. Your fictional character can live in any part of the United States. He or she might be an enslaved African, a southern plantation owner, a northern abolitionist, or a settler in one of the new territories. Your classmates are your audience.
United
States
World
