SECTION 4: Europe before Transatlantic Travel................22
The Big Idea New ideas and trade changed Europeans' lives.
■■*°awiiba
A
Travelogue People who make long trips often write travelogues that describe their journeys. A travelogue allows people who did not make the trip to experience some of the same sights, sounds, and thoughts that the traveler did. In this chapter, you will gather information about different regions of the world and then write a travelogue describing what a place in one of these regions might have been like. Chapter
Events
c. 38,000-10,000 BC
Paleo-lndians migrate to the Americas.
World
Events
? CHAPTER 1
Reading Social Studies
Economics
Geography
Politics
Society and Culture
Science and Technology
Focus on Themes This chapter explains the early development of Mesoamerica and North America. You will read about early explorers from Europe, learn about early American settlements, and discover why the Spanish, the English, and the
French all wanted a part of this new land. As you read the chapter, you will see how geography affected exploration and will learn about the economic issues that influenced growth and settlement.
Specialized Vocabulary of Social Studies
FOCUS on Reading If you flipped through the pages of this book, would you expect to see anything about square roots or formulas? How about petri dishes or hypotheses? Of course you wouldn't. Those are terms you'd only see in math and science books.
Specialized Vocabulary Like most academic subjects, social studies has its own specialized vocabulary. Included in it are words and phrases you will see over and over as you read social studies materials. The charts below list some terms you may encounter as you read this book.
Social Studies Terms	
decade	a period of 10 years
century	a period of 100 years
era	a long period marked by great events, developments, or figures
politics	the art of creating government policies
economics	the study of the creation and use of goods and services
movement	a series of actions that bring about or try to bring about a change in society
campaign	an effort to win a political office, or a series of military actions
colony	a territory settled and controlled by a country
Social Studies Vocabulary when you read or hear one of these terms used in class, make a note of it. Write down the term, the sentence in which it was used, and its meaning. If you don't know the definition of a social studies term, ask your teacher or a classmate. Make sure you understand the word by telling them or writing down the definition in your own words.
Each chapter has a list of vocabulary words found in the chapter. Write a definition for each term, and use the word in class discussions. If you don't understand the way the teacher or a classmate uses the word, ask for an explanation. If one of your classmates asks for a definition, explain the word you used.
Write down any words you hear or read that you think have a specialized meaning for social studies along with their definitions.
Academic Words Look at the Words to Know on page H5. As you read these words in the textbook, write their definitions in your own words. Use the words in class discussions, assignments, and presentations. Talk about the definitions with your teacher and classmates. If one of your classmates asks for a definition, explain the word.
4 CHAPTER 1
You Try It!
The following passage shows you how some specialized vocabulary is defined in context.
From
Chapter 1, P-12
[ Native American Culture Areas
I
Native Americans in the Pacific Northwest j carved images of totems—ancestor or ani-I mal spirits—on tall, wooden poles. Totem 5 poles held great religious and historical i significance for Native Americans of the 5 Northwest. Feasts called potlatches were another unique, or unusual, aspect of these Native Americans' culture. Use the clues to understand meaning.
1.	Find the word totems. The phrase after the dash is the definition. Often in this book, specialized vocabulary words are defined after a dash. So be on the lookout for dashes.
2.	The word potlatch is defined in the third sentence. The clue to finding this definition is the word called. Words like called and known as can indicate that a definition is coming up. In this case, the word feasts is a definition of potlatch.
3.	In the first sentence, you see a term that is in boldface print. You should recognize that word from seeing it in the section opener. The definition is highlighted. Why do you think some specialized vocabulary words are in boldface print, while others are not?
4.	The word unique is defined in the final sentence. The clue to finding this definition is the comma followed by the word or. So be on the lookout for commas followed by or.
J
As you read Chapter 1, keep track in i your notebook of the specialized I vocabulary you learn. Chapter 1
Section 1
Bering Land Bridge (p. 6) Paleo-lndians (p. 6) migration (p. 6) hunter-gatherers (p. 6) environments (p. 7) culture Ip. 7)
Section 2
pueblos (p. 11)
kivas (p. 11)
totems (p. 12)
teepees (p. 14)
matrilineal (p. 14)
Iroquois League (p. 14)
Section 3
Berbers (p. 16)
Mansa Musa (p. 18)
hajj (p. 18)
mosques (p. 19)
Askia the Great Ip. 19)
Section 4
Socrates Ip. 22)
Plato (p. 22)
Aristotle (p. 22)
reason Ip. 22)
democracy (p. 23)
knights (p. 24)
Black Death Ip. 25)
Michelangelo (p. 26)
Leonardo da Vinci (p. 26)
Johannes Gutenberg Ip. 27) joint-stock companies (p. 27)
Academic Vocabulary
Success in school is related to knowing academic vocabulary— the words that are frequently used in school assignments and discussions. In this chapter, you will learn the following academic words:
develop (p. 8) classical Ip. 23)
THE WORLD
BEFfRE THE OPENING OF THE ATLANTIC 5 
The Earliest
Americans
What You Will Learn...
Main Ideas
1.	Climate changes allowed Paleo-lndians to begin the first migration to the Americas.
2.	Early societies existed in Mesoamerica and South America.
The Big Idea
If YOU were there...
You are living in North America about 10,000 years ago, close to the end of the Ice Age. For weeks, your group has been following a herd of elk across a marshy landscape. This trip has taken you far from your usual hunting grounds. The air is warmer here. There are thick grasses and bushes full of berries. You decide to camp here for the summer and perhaps stay a while.
How would settling here change your way of life?
Native American societies developed across Mesoamerica and South America.
T
Key Terms and People
Bering Land Bridge, p. 6 Paleo-lndians, p. 6 migration, p. 6 hunter-gatherers, p. 6 environments, p. 7 culture, p. 7
I hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the migrations of people to the Americas and the earliest American cultures and their locations.
E BUILDING BACKGROUND
The first settlers to the Americas I probably came in small groups from Asia. Over thousands of years, I they moved into nearly every region of North and South America.	?
s Inthe Americas, these people encountered, and adapted to, many	'
different climates and types of land.
First Migration to the Americas
Many scientists believe that the first people arrived in North America during the last Ice Age. At the start of the Ice Age, Earth's climate became intensely cold. Large amounts of water froze into huge, moving sheets of ice called glaciers. As a result, ocean levels dropped more than 300 feet lower than they are today. When the sea level fell, a land bridge between northeastern Asia and present-day Alaska was exposed. Geographers call this strip of land the Bering Land Bridge. Although no one knows exactly when or how people crossed into North America, evidence suggests that people called Paleo-lndians crossed this bridge into Alaska between 38,000 and 10,000 BC.
This migration—a movement of people or animals from one region to another—took place over a long time. It is believed that Paleo-lndians traveled south into Canada, the United States, and Mexico following herds of animals. Over time, their descendants went as far as the southern tip of South America. These people were hunter-gatherers, people who hunted animals and gathered wild plants for food.
6 CHAPTER 1
Reading Check
Drawing Conclusions How
did climate change affect early peoples' migrations?
GEOGRAPHY
SKILLS {interpreting maps
1.	Movement In what general direction did early peoples migrate?
2.	Human-Environment Interaction
What natural features affected the route people took from Alaska to southern North America?
About 8000 BC,
Earth's climate grew warmer, and the Ice Age ended. Rising temperatures melted glaciers. Water levels in the oceans rose, and the Bering
Land Bridge was covered with water.
The warmer climate at the end of the Ice Age created new environments, climates and landscapes that surround living things. Large herds of animals such as buffalo and deer ate new short grasses that thrived in the warm climate. As the number of these animals grew, Paleo-lndians hunted these animals for survival.
Varied environments influenced the development of different Native American societies, or groups that share a culture. Culture is a group's set of common values and traditions, including language, government, and family relationships.
Like all societies, Native American groups changed over time. People planted seeds, and eventually they learned to breed animals, farm, and grow plants. Maize, or corn, was one of their most important early crops. Later, they learned to grow beans and squash. Farming allowed people to stop moving around looking for food and to settle in one place. With adequate food supplies, settlements could support larger populations. As populations grew, more advanced societies began to develop.
THE WDRLD BEFORE THE OPENING OF
Academic Vocabulary develop the process of growing or improving
Early Mesoamerican and South American Societies
Some of the earliest American cultures arose in Mesoamerica, a region that includes the southern part of what is now Mexico and the northern parts of Central America.
Olmec and Maya
Around 1200 BC the Olmec developed the earliest known civilization in Mesoamerica. The Olmec are known for their use of stone in architecture and sculpture. They built the first pyramids in the Americas, and they created sculptures of huge stone heads. When their civilization ended around 400 BC, trade had spread Olmec culture throughout the region.
Like the Olmec, the Maya grew maize and other crops and lived in small villages. These villages traded goods with each other, and by about AD 200, the Maya were building large cities.
Maya cities had pyramids, large stone temples, palaces, and bridges. The Maya also paved large plazas for public gatherings and built canals to control the flow of water through the cities.
In the 900s Maya civilization began to collapse. Historians are still not sure what caused this great civilization's decline.
Aztec
The Aztec were fierce warriors, and their superior military ability was key to their success. Around the mid-HOOs AD, the Aztec migrated south to central Mexico. They conquered many towns, made alliances to build their empire, and controlled a huge trade network.
In AD 1325, the Aztec founded their capital, Tenochtitlan (tay-nawch-teet-LAHN), on an island in Lake Texcoco. It became the greatest city in the Americas and one of the world's largest cities. The city's island location made travel and trade difficult, so the Aztec built raised roads to connect the island to the shore.
Trade and tribute paid by conquered people in the form of cotton, gold, and food made the Aztec rich. By the early 1500s, they ruled the most powerful state in Mesoamerica.
Inca
The Inca began as a small tribe in the Andes Mountains of South America. They named their capital city Cuzco (Koo-skoh). In the
i
mid-1400s, the Inca began to expand their territory. By the 1500s the empire stretched along the Pacific coast from what is now northern Ecuador to central Chile. In time, the empire was home to about 12 million people. The Inca formed a strong central government with a king as ruler. The official language of the empire was Quechua. Because there was no written language, records were kept on a system of knotted strings called quipu.
The Inca are known for building and for art. Massive buildings and forts were made of huge stone blocks. An advanced system of highways ran the length of the empire. Paved roads and rope bridges connected all parts of Inca territory. This enabled the Inca to communicate with and control their large empire.
READING CHECK
Summarizing What early civilizations existed in Mesoamerica and South America?
I
Summary and Preview Early people I migrated into North and South America and developed societies. In the next section you will learn about Native American cultures in North America. Section 1 Assessment
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Recall What was the Ice Age?
b.	Summarize Why were early peoples able to use the Bering Land Bridge?
c.	Predict Why do you think early peoples in the Americas migrated south?
2.	a. Identify What is the earliest known civilization in the Americas, and where was it located?
b.	Analyze How did the Aztec build such a powerful, rich state?
c.	Draw Conclusions Which of the four civilizations discussed do you think was the most highly developed?
GEOGRAPHY
SKILLS! INTERPRETING MAPS
1.	Location Which early civilization was located in Mesoamerica?
2.	Human-Environment Interaction Why do
you think Peru was settled after Mexico?
Critical Thinking
3. Categorizing Review your notes on the migration of early peoples and their societies. Then copy the table below and use it to identify the accomplishments of early American civilizations.
	Rise	Significant Accomplishments
Olmec		
Maya		
Aztec		
Inca		
Understanding Ancient Peoples Use the descrip- j tions of the earliest Americans found in this section j to list some similarities and differences between the j lives of ancient peoples and your life today.	;
THE WORLD BEFORETHE OPENING OF THE ATLANTIC
Native American Cu Mtu ires
What You Will Learn...
1.	Several early societies developed in North America long before Europeans explored the continent.
2.	Geographic areas influenced Native American cultures.
3. Native American cultures shared beliefs about religion and land ownership.
If YOU were there...
You live in the North American Southwest about 1,000 years ago. You've been working in the fields for several hours today. The maize crop looks good this summer, and you are hoping for a successful harvest. After finishing your work, you walk home. The opening to your house is in a cliff wall 30 feet above a canyon floor. You must use ladders to get to the opening.
Do you like the location of your home? Why?
Many diverse Native American cultures developed across the different geographic regions of North America.
----------------
Key Terms and People
pueblos, p. 11
kivas, p. 11
totems, p. 12
teepees, p. 14
matrilineal, p. 14
Iroquois League, p. 14
BUILDING BACKGROUND
After crossing the land bridge from Asia during the Ice Age, hunter-gatherer groups spread into every region of North America. Many diverse cultures formed as Native i Americans adapted to their different environments.
hmhsocialstudies.com |
f TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on Native American cultures of North America.
Early Societies
The earliest people in North America were hunter-gatherers. After 5000 BC some of these people learned how to farm, and they settled in villages. Although less populated than South America and Mesoamerica, North America had many complex societies long before Europeans reached the continent.
Anasazi
By 1500 BC the people who lived in the North American Southwest, like those who lived in Mesoamerica, were growing maize. One of the early farm cultures in the Southwest was the Anasazi (ah-nuh-SAH-zee). The Anasazi lived in the Four Comers region, where present-day Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah meet. Anasazi farmers adapted to their dry environment and grew maize, beans, and squash. Over time, they began to use irrigation to increase food production. By the time the Anasazi settled in the area, they were already skilled basket makers. They wove straw, vines, and yucca to make containers for food and other items, and they eventually became skilled potters as well.
CHAPTER 1
Anasazi Cliff Dwellings
Dwellings like these were built into cliffs for safety. Often, ladders were needed to reach the buildings. The ladders could be removed, keeping invaders from reaching the dwelllings.
The early Anasazi lived in pit houses dug into the ground. After about AD 750 they built pueblos, or aboveground houses made of a heavy clay called adobe. The Anasazi built these houses on top of each other, creating large multistoried complexes. Some pueblos had several hundred rooms and could house 1,000 people.
The Anasazi often built their houses in canyon walls and had to use ladders to enter their homes. These cliff dwellings provided a strong defense against enemies. The Anasazi also built kivas, underground ceremonial chambers, at the center of each community. Kivas were sacred areas used for religious ceremonies. Some of these rituals focused on the life-giving forces of rain and maize.
The Anasazi thrived for hundreds of years. After AD 1300, however, they began to abandon their villages. Scholars believe that drought, disease, or raids by nomadic tribes from the north may have caused the Anasazi to move away from their pueblos.
Mound Builders
Several farming societies developed in the eastern part of North America after 1000 BC. The Hopewell lived along the Mississippi, Ohio, and lower Missouri river valleys.
They supported their large population with agriculture and trade. They built large burial mounds to honor their dead.
The Hopewell culture had declined by AD 700. Another culture, the Mississippian, began to thrive in the same area. Skilled farmers and traders, the Mississippian built large settlements. Their largest city, Cahokia, was located near present-day Saint Louis, Missouri. It had a population of 30,000.
The Mississippian built hundreds of mounds for religious ceremonies. Cahokia alone had more than 100 temple and burial mounds. These mounds had flat tops, and temples were built on top of the mounds. Many of the mounds were gigantic. Monks Mound, near Collinsville, Illinois, for example, was 100 feet high and covered 16 acres.
Several other mound-building cultures thrived in eastern North America. More than 10,000 mounds have been found in the Ohio River valley alone. Some of these mounds are shaped like birds and snakes. The moundbuilding cultures had declined by the time European explorers reached the Southeast. Their societies no longer existed by the early 1700s.
Summarizing Why did
some Native American groups build mounds?
READING CHECK
THE WORLD BEFORE THE OPENING OF THE ATLANTIC 11
FOCUS ON
Reaping What is the definition of totems according to this sentence? Native American Culture Areas
Researchers use culture areas—the geographic locations that influenced societies—to help them describe ancient Native American peoples. North America is divided into several culture areas.
North and Northwest
The far north of North America is divided into the Arctic and Subarctic culture areas. Few plants grow in the Arctic because the ground is always frozen beneath a thin top layer of soil. This harsh environment was home to two groups of people, the Inuit and the Aleut. The Inuit lived in present-day northern Alaska and Canada. Their homes were igloos, hide tents, and huts. The Aleut, whose home was in western and southern Alaska, lived in multifamily houses that were partially underground. The two groups shared many cultural features, including language. Both groups survived by fishing and hunting large mammals. The Aleut and Inuit also depended on dogs for many tasks, such as hunting and pulling sleds.
South of the Arctic lies the Subarctic, home to groups such as the Dogrib and Mon-tagnais peoples. While they followed the seasonal migrations of deer, these peoples lived in shelters made of animal skins. At other times, they lived in villages made up of log houses. Farther south, the Kwakiutl and the Chinook thrived, thanks to the rich supply of game animals, fish, and wild plants that allowed large populations to increase without the need for farming.
Native Americans in the Pacific Northwest carved images of totems—ancestor or animal spirits—on tall, wooden poles. Totem poles held great religious and historical significance for Native Americans of the Northwest. Feasts called potlatches were another unique, or unusual, aspect of these Native Americans' culture. At these gatherings, hosts, usually chiefs or wealthy people, gave away most of their belongings as gifts. In this way, the hosts increased their social importance.
Bering
Sea
West and Southwest
Farther south along the Pacific coast was the California region, which included the area between the Pacific and the Sierra Nevada mountain range. Food sources were plentiful, so farming was not necessary. One major plant food was acoms, which were ground into flour. People also fished and hunted deer and other game. Most Native Americans in the California region lived in groups of families of about 50 to 300. Among these groups, including the Hupa, Miwok, and Yokuts, more than 100 languages were spoken.
The area east of the Sierra Nevada, the Great Basin, received little rain. To survive, Native Americans adapted to the drier climate by gathering seeds, digging roots, and trapping small animals for food. Most groups in this area, including the Paiute, Shoshone, and Ute, spoke the same language.
The Southwest culture region included the present-day states of Arizona and New Mexico, and parts of Colorado and Texas. Pueblo groups, such as the Hopi and Zuni, lived there. Like the Anasazi, these Native Americans also adapted to a dry climate. The Pueblo irrigated the land and grew maize, squash, and beans. These crops were vital to southwestern peoples. The Pueblo religion focused on two key areas of Pueblo life, rain and maize. The Pueblo performed religious rituals hoping to bring rain and a successful maize crop to their peoples.
Pueblo peoples were settled and built multistoried houses out of adobe bricks. Over time their towns grew larger, and some towns had more than 1,000 residents. Pueblo peoples made fine pottery that featured beautifully painted designs.
12 CHAPTER 1
t «ey': •
Native American Culture Areas
Inuit

11 Arctic	MB	Northeast
IB
Subarctic 1 | Great Basin MB
Northwest Coast 1 ] California j j Plateau	[	I	Southwest
[ ' | Great Plains MB Southeast 0	250	500 Miles
250	500 Kilometers
30‘W
40°W
(Han
>Saschutkenne

c\G



Tagish
Dogrib
Inuit
50°W
V
a
"Tiingit
Bird-shaped pipe, Northwest Coast culture area
Chit
\ Hudson Bay
Inuit
Sewing tool with carved bone handle, Great Plains culture area

Naskapi
fHaisla
Cree
M
Shuswap
oksack nakum f
Qaiich »» ColumbiaA Salish* )s kane
ChmopK Yakima
NORTH
AMERICA
Montagnais
Micmac
Blackfoot
*>>
Klickitat walla Walla ?>« Yaquina
Plains Plains Cree Ojibway
\Mandan
Algonquian Ottawa
flassachuset
6o;w
A


Crow
Northern	<
Paiute rv /	Teton Sioux
NortWm QI£8Yenne -----------s
Shoshone	Omaha
.	. . v »"’'*’>•	^^-Pawneey
Wappo) %	r 3>^^^Arapaho
Kansa

Totowa” J*®49®. Hjjpa f'fcchon'87'1'
Sante
Sioux^

Sauk I
Iowa)


Foxl
Kickapoo
Miami
Miwok r
Costanoan < RfonoY-Yfc^ f*?’ E**elen Kawafi S
Illinois
Missouri" Cahokia*
Osage
ATLA NTIC OCEAN
Yokuts Chun



Kiowa
Comanche
Nakipaf
Wichita
Caddo	(
Tonkawa	1
Tuskegee^
Ataban Choctaw
J
Sen
IB!
Gulf of Mexico
x Cancel- -*Jlz-*'
Troeco’S-

Guachichil
GEOGRAPHY
SKILLS! INTERPRETING MAPS
MESOAMERI
.....&;»?
Human figure, Southwest culture area
1.	Region Why did some culture areas have fewer groups of people than other culture areas did?
2.	Human-Environment Interaction What natural features served as boundaries between culture areas?
Caribbean
Sea
PACIFIC OCEAN

THE WORLD BEFORE THE
l 
110’W
100 w
9o;w
8O’W
The Apache and Navajo also lived in the Southwest. These groups were nomadic—they moved from place to place hunting small animals and foraging for food. The Apache and Navajo also supported themselves by raiding the villages of the Pueblo and others.
Great Plains
The huge Great Plains region stretches south from Canada into Texas. This culture area is bordered by the Mississippi Valley on the east and the Rocky Mountains on the west. The Plains were mainly grassland, home to millions of buffalo. Deer, elk, and other game also thrived there.
Most Great Plains r eoples were nomadic hunters. Many groups hunted buffalo using bows and spears. Blackfoot and Arapaho hunters sometimes chased the animals over cliffs, drove them into corrals, or trapped them in a ring of fire. Native Americans used buffalo skins for shields, clothing, and coverings for their teepees—cone-shaped shelters.
Some Plains groups were farmers. The Mandan and Pawnee settled in villages and grew corn, beans, and squash. The Pawnee lived in round lodges made of dirt. Like some other Native American groups, Pawnee society was matrilineal. This means that people traced their ancestry through their mothers, not their fathers.
Northeast and Southeast
Eastern North America was rich in sources for food and shelter. Animals, plant foods, fish, and wood for housing were plentiful in the region's woodlands and river valleys.
Most southeastern groups, including the Cherokee, Creek, and Seminole, lived in farming villages governed by village councils. In the Northeast, groups like the Algonquian survived by hunting and gathering plants. Those in the south farmed, hunted, gathered plants, and fished. Many tribes used strings of beads known as wampum for money.
To the east of the Algonquian lived the Iroquois (or Haudenosaunee). They were farmers, hunters, and traders who lived in longhouses, or rectangular homes made from logs and bark, that housed 8 to 10 families.
The Iroquois created the Iroquois League. This confederation, or alliance, was established by the Cayuga, Mohawk, Oneida, Onondaga, and Seneca. The league waged war against and made peace with non-Iroquois peoples. Its goal was to strengthen the alliance against invasion. The league helped the Iroquois become one of the most powerful Native American peoples in North America.
Generalizing How did
environment influence Native American cultures in North America?
READING CHECK
j CHAPTER 1
Shared Beliefs
Although they were different culturally and geographically Native American groups of North America shared certain beliefs. The religion of most Native American peoples, for example, was linked to nature. Native Americans believed that spiritual forces were everywhere, dwelling in heavenly bodies and in sacred places on the earth. Spirits even lived within animals and plants. Native Americans tried to honor the spirits in their daily lives.
Ceremonies maintained the group's relationship with Earth and Sky, which were believed to be the sustainers of life. In addition, individuals who wanted help prayed to their spirit protector.
Native Americans also shared beliefs about property. They believed that individual ownership only applied to the crops one grew. The land itself was for the use of everyone in the village, and a person's right
to use it was temporary. Native Americans also thought they should preserve the land for future generations. These beliefs contrasted sharply with those of Europeans— a difference that would cause conflict.
Despite their shared beliefs, the diverse culture groups of North America had little interest in joining together into large political units. As a result, Native Americans on the North American continent did not form large empires like the Aztec and Inca of Meso-and South America did.
Reading check
Identifying Points of View
What religious beliefs did Native American groups share?
I
Summary and Preview People of I North America formed many complex societies. In the next section you will read about societies in West Africa.
Section 2 Assessment	hmhsocialstudies.com]
ONLINE QUIZ J
Reviewing ideas, Terms, and People
; 1. a. Recall Why did the Anasazi build kivas?
b. Summarize What different types of housing were built by the Anasazi?
i c. Draw Conclusions Why do you think that some i	mounds were built in the shape of birds and snakes?
j 2. a. Identify What are culture areas?
b. Contrast How did food sources for Native
I
Americans of the North and Northwest differ from ' those of Native Americans living in the West and f Southwest? ' c. Elaborate Why was the formation of the f	Iroquois League considered to be a significant
political development?
i 3. a. Recall How did Native Americans view land 1	ownership?
b.	Analyze What role did religion play in the lives
,	of Native Americans?
c.	Predict Why do you think most Native American groups did not form large empires like the Aztec
■ and the Inca did?
Critical Thinking	j
4. Comparing and Contrasting Review your notes * on early societies and culture areas. Then use a Venn | diagram like this one to identify similarities and dif- j ferences among Native American culture groups. ;
"’J'WriteSmart
5. Describing Culture Look back through this	j
section to discover ways in which a group's beliefs, j environment, and practices can be described. Write J down phrases that you think are especially useful in j understanding Native American cultures.	j
i

I
r
THE WORLD BEFORE THE OPENING OF THE ATLANTIC 15
Trading Kingdoms of West Africa
What You Will Learn...
1.	West Africa developed three great kingdoms that grew wealthy through their control of trade.
2.	Slaves became a valuable trade item in West Africa.
T
If YOU were there...
You are a trader's assistant from the Middle East, traveling in a caravan headed for West Africa. The caravan carries many goods, but the most precious is salt. Your job is to trade the salt for gold and return the gold to your employer immediately. Your boss never meets the traders face to face.
Why is your boss so secretive?
The Big Idea
Using trade to gain wealth, Ghana, Mali, and Songhai were West Africa's most powerful kingdoms.
Key Terms and People
Berbers, p. 16
Mansa Musa, p. 18 hajj, p. 18 mosques, p. 19 Askia the Great, p. 19
hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the rise of early African kingdoms and the role of trade in their development.
BUILDING BACKGROUND
The continent of Africa was luxuriously < rich in resources. West Africa had both fertile soils and valuable minerals, j especially gold and iron. Ancienttrade routes had connected Africa with j : the Middle East and Asia for hundreds of years. Over time, trade devel- \ oped between regions with different resources. Trade and abundant	j
t resources led to the growth of several great kingdoms in West Africa. ’
L.............................. ...................*___________J
West Africa's Great Kingdoms
For hundreds of years, trade routes crisscrossed West Africa. For most of that time, West Africans did not profit much from the Saharan trade because the routes were run by Berbers, a group of people from northern Africa. Eventually, that situation changed. A succession of three great kingdoms came to power as their peoples gained control of valuable trade routes in West Africa. Ghana (gah-nuh) was the first of these empires, followed by the kingdoms of Mali (MAH-lee) and Songhai (sAWNG-hy).
Kingdom of Ghana
Historians think the first people in Ghana were farmers along the Niger River. Sometime after AD 300 these farmers, the Soninke (soh-NiNG-kee), were threatened by nomadic herders. The herders wanted to take the farmers' water and pastures. For protection, groups of Soninke families began to band together. This banding together was the beginning of Ghana.

6 CHAPTER 1
I
Ghana's rulers grew wealthy by controlling trade in salt and gold. Salt came from the north in large slab;, and gold came from the south.
What does the photo to the left suggest about the amount of salt traded in a market?
.j™
■■Mailtt
■BKIKSB
siMkMMlISH
Ghana was in an ideal position to become a trading center. To the north lay the vast Sahara, the source of much of the salt. Ghana itself was rich in gold. People wanted gold for its beauty, but they needed salt in their diets to survive. Salt, which could be used to preserve food, also made bland food tasty. These qualities made salt very valuable. In fact, Africans sometimes cut up slabs of salt and used the pieces as money.
As trade in gold and salt increased, Ghana's rulers gained power. Eventually, they built up armies equipped with iron weapons that were superior to the weapons of nearby people. Over time, Ghana took control of trade from merchants. Merchants from the north and south then met to exchange goods in Ghana.
By 800 Ghana was firmly in control of West Africa's trade routes. Nearly all trade between northern and southern Africa passed through Ghana. With so many traders passing through their lands, Ghana's rulers looked for ways to make money from them. One way they raised money was by forcing traders to pay taxes. Every trader who entered Ghana had to pay a special tax
on the goods he earned. Then he had to pay another tax on any goods he took with him when he left. Ghana's rulers gained incredible wealth from trade, taxes on traders and on the people of Ghana, and their own personal stores of gold. They used their wealth to build an army and an empire.
Islam in Ghana
Extensive trade routes brought the people of Ghana into contact with people of many different cultures and beliefs. As the kingdom of Ghana extended into the Sahara, increased contact with Arab traders from the east brought the religion of Islam to Ghana.
Islam was founded in the 600s by an Arab named Muhammad. Muslims, followers of Islam, believe that God had spoken to Muhammad through an angel and had made him a prophet, someone who tells of God's messages. After Muhammad's death, his followers wrote down his teachings to form the book known as the Qur'an. Islam spread quickly through the Arabian Peninsula.
In the 1060s, a Muslim group called the Almoravids (al-muh-RAH-vuhdz) attacked Ghana in an effort to force its leaders to
THE WORLD BEFORE THE OPENING OF THE ATLANTIC 17
i Gulf of
I
Guinea 1. Location On what river are Timbuktu and Gao located? ’ 2. Region Which empires ruled Timbuktu and Gao?
convert to Islam. The Almoravids weakened Ghana's empire and cut off many trade routes. Without its trade, Ghana could not support its empire, and the empire eventually fell. The influence of Islam, however, remained strong. By the late 1400s Islam would become the most practiced religion in the region. Kingdom of Mali
Like Ghana, Mali lay along the upper Niger River. This area's fertile soil helped Mali grow. In addition, Mali's location on the Niger allowed its people to control trade on the river. Through this control of trade, the empire grew rich and powerful. According to legend, Mali's rise to power began under a ruler named Sundiata. Sundiata won back his country's independence and conquered nearby kingdoms, including Ghana.
Mali's most famous ruler, however, was a Muslim king named Mansa Musa (MAHN-sah moo-sAH). Under his leadership, Mali reached the height of its wealth, power, and fame.
Mansa Musa ruled Mali for about 25 years, from 1312 to 1337. During that time, Mali added many important trade cities, including Timbuktu (tim-buhk-Too), Djenne (je-NAY), and Gao (gow), to its empire. Traders came to Timbuktu from the north and the south to trade for salt, gold, metals, shells, and many other goods.
Religion was also very important to Mansa Musa. In 1324 he left Mali on a hajj, or pilgrimage to Mecca. Making this journey once in their lives is the spiritual duty of all Muslims. As he traveled to Mecca, Mansa Musa introduced his empire to the world. The stories of Mali's wealth and religion spread far and wide. Because of Mansa Musa's influence, Islam spread through a large part of West Africa.
Mansa Musa wanted all Muslims to be able to read the Qur'an. Therefore, he stressed the importance of learning to read and write the Arabic language. He sent scholars to study in Morocco. These scholars later set up schools in Mali for studying the Qur'an.
8 CHAPTER 1
To encourage the spread of Islam in West Africa, Mansa Musa brought back artists and architects from other Muslim countries to build mosques, or buildings for Muslim prayer, throughout his lands.
The architectural advances in cities like Timbuktu as well as an organized government, an emphasis on education, and expansion of trade all combined to make Mansa Musa Mali's most successful ruler. Much of Mali's success depended on strong leaders. After Mansa Musa died, poor leadership weakened the empire. By 1500 nearly all of the lands the kingdom once ruled were lost. Only a small area of Mali remained. Songhai Empire
In the 1300s Mansa Musa had conquered a rival kingdom of people called the Songhai, who also lived along the Niger River. As the Mali Empire weakened in the 1400s, the Songhai grew in strength. They took advantage of
Mali's decline, regained their independence, and eventually conquered most of Mali.
One of Songhai's greatest rulers was Muhammad Ture, who chose the title askia, a title of military rank. He became known as Askia the Great. Like Mansa Musa, Askia the Great was a devout Muslim who supported education and learning. Under his rule, the cities of Gao and Timbuktu flourished. They contained great mosques, universities, schools, and libraries. People came from all parts of West Africa to study mathematics, science, medicine, grammar, and law.
Askia understood that an empire needed effective government. He created a professional army, and to improve the government, he set up five provinces within Songhai. He removed local leaders and appointed new governors who were loyal to him. He also created specialized departments to oversee various tasks, much like modern-day government offices do.
THE IMPACT^
TODAYS
Some of the mosques built by Mansa Musa can still be seen in West Africa today.
Linking to today
ANALYSIS
SKILL! ANALYZING INFORMATION
Music from Senegal to Memphis
Did you know that the music you listen to today may have begun with the griots, musicians from West Africa? From the 1600s to the 1800sz many people from West Africa were brought to America as slaves. In America, these slaves continued to sing the way they had in Africa. They also continued to play
traditional instruments such as the kora, shown here being played by Senegalese musician Soriba Kouyate (far right). Over time, this music developed into a style called the blues, made popular by such artists as B. B. King (near right). In turn, the blues shaped other styles of music, including jazz and rock. So, the next time you hear a Memphis blues song or a cool jazz tune, listen for its ancient African roots.
How did West African music affect modern American music?
THE WORLD BEFORE THE OPENING OF THE ATLANTIC 19
Soon after Askia the Great lost power, the empire of Songhai declined. Songhai was invaded by the Moroccans, the kingdom's northern neighbors. The Moroccans wanted to control the Saharan salt mines. They had superior military power and were able to take over Timbuktu and Gao. Changes in trade patterns completed Songhai's fall.
Reading Check
Comparing What did Ghana, Mali, and Songhai have in common?
West African Slave Trade
The practice of slavery had existed in Africa and in many parts of the world for centuries. Traditionally, slavery in West Africa mostly involved only black Africans, who were both slaveholders and slaves. This changed in the 600s when Arab Muslims, and later Europeans, became slave traders. Though Europeans had long traded resources with Africa, they became more interested in the growing slave trade.
People who were captured by warring groups during battle could be sold into slavery. In addition, criminals were sometimes sold as slaves. Other enslaved people were captured during raids on villages, and sometimes
even the relatives of people who owed money were sold into slavery as payment for debts. Enslaved Africans were often bought to perform menial labor and domestic chores. In some cultures, having slaves raised the status of the slaveholder.
The market for West African slaves increased as Muslim traders bought or seized black Africans to sell in North Africa. West Africa was also home to many enslaved Africans brought to the Americas.
Over time, the slave trade became even more important to the West African economy. Kings traded slaves for valuable goods, such as horses from the Middle East and textiles and weapons from Europe. The trans-Saharan slave trade contributed to the power of Ghana, Mali, and Songhai.
READING CHECK
Drawing Inferences Why did
the slave trade in West Africa continue to grow?
Summary and preview Trade was important to the kingdoms of West Africa.
In the next section you will learn about European trade.
Section 3 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify How did West African kingdoms grow wealthy through trade?
b.	Describe How did Mansa Musa introduce his empire to the world?
c.	Elaborate Why was trade crucial to the survival of Ghana, Mali, and Songhai?
2.	a. Describe How did some people become slaves in West Africa?
b.	Analyze What role did geography play in the development of the slave trade?
c.	Judge Why did the value of slaves as an export increase over time?
Critical Thinking
3.	Comparing and Contrasting Review your chart on African kingdoms and trade. Then copy the diagram
below and use it to show the similarities and differences in the fall of each kingdom.
Fall of Ghana, Mali, and Songhai	Similarities	Differences
		
4. Gathering Information on Economies
Make a list of things that were important to the economies of the kingdoms of West Africa. Includi your ideas about what seems most important to West Africans and things that you did not know about before reading this section.
0 CHAPTER 1
Biography
Mansa Musa
How could one man’s travels
become a historic event?
When did he live? the late 1200s and early 1300s
Where did he live? Mali
What did he do? Mansa Musa, the ruler of Mali, was one of the Muslim kings of West Africa. He became a major figure in African and world history largely because of a pilgrimage he made to the city of Mecca.
Why is he important? Mansa Musa's spectacular journey attracted the attention of the Muslim world and of Europe. For the first time, other people's eyes turned to West Africa. During his travels, Mansa Musa gave out huge
amounts of gold. His spending made people eager to find the source of such wealth. Within 200 years, European explorers would arrive on the shores of western Africa.
KEY FACTS
r.y Identifying Points of View How do you
1 think Mansa Musa changed people's views of West Africa?
According to chroniclers of the time, Mansa Musa was accompanied on his journey to Mecca by some 60,000 people. Of those people,
>	12,000 were servants to attend to the king.
>	500 were servants to attend tp his wife.
>	14,000 were slaves wearing rich fabrics such as silk.
500 carried staffs heavily decorated with gold. Historians have estimated that the gold Mansa Musa gave away on his trip would be worth more than $100 million today.
THE GRANGER COLLECTION, NEW YORK
This Spanish map from 1375 shows Mansa Musa sitting on his throne.

What You Will Learn...	J
1.	The Greeks and Romans
established new forms of government.	;
2.	During the Middle Ages, society
eventually changed from a	i
feudal syste m to a syste m
with a middle class of artisans and merchants.
3.	The Renaissance was a time	t
of rebirth in the arts and in learning.	i
Europe before Transatlantic Travel
If YOU were there...
You are a peasant in the Middle Ages, living on the land of a noble. Although you and your family work very hard from sunrise to sundown, much of the food you grow goes to the noble. Your house is very small and has a dirt floor. Your parents are tired and weak, and you wish you could do something to improve their lives.
Is there any way you could change your life?
The Big Idea J
New ideas and trade changed Europeans' lives.
V.:.-... „...............,.■.... J
Key Terms and People
Socrates, p. 22
Plato, p. 22
Aristotle, p. 22
reason, p. 22
democracy, p. 23
knights, p. 24
Black Death, p. 25
Michelangelo, p. 26
Leonardo da Vinci, p. 26 Johannes Gutenberg, p. 21 joint-stock companies, p. 21
hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the changes in society during the periods listed.
BDING BACKGROUND
Hard work was a constant theme in res of peasants in the Middle Ages. Nobles were not free to live as
, :hose, either. As the Middle Ages ended, the Renaissance brought i new ways of thinking, and the growth of cities brought big changes to the way people lived and worked.
Greek and Roman Government
During the Renaissance, European thinkers and artists rediscovered the traditions of Greece and Rome. Ancient Greek and Roman texts were translated, and their ideas began to revolutionize European societies.
Greek Philosophers and Government
Ancient Greeks valued human reason and believed in the power of the human mind to think, explain, and understand life. Three of the greatest Greek thinkers, or philosophers, were Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. Socrates, a great teacher, wanted to make people think and question their own beliefs. Plato, a philosopher and teacher, wrote a work called The Republic. It describes an ideal society based on justice and fairness for everyone. Aristotle taught that people should live lives based on reason, or clear and ordered thinking.
22 CHAPTER 1
Greek scientists and mathematicians also gained fame for their contributions to geometry and for accurately calculating the size of Earth. Doctors studied the human body to understand how it worked. One Greek engineering invention that is still used today is a water screw, which brings water to farm fields.
One of the Greeks' most lasting contributions, however, is their political system. During the time known as the Classical Period, around the fifth and fourth centuries BC, Greece was organized into several hundred independent city-states, which became the foundation for Greek civilization. Athens was the first Greek city-state to establish democracy—a form of government in which people rale themselves. All male citizens in Athens had the right to participate in the assembly, a gathering of citizens, to debate and create the city's laws. Because all male citizens in Athens participated directly in government, we call the Greek form of government a direct democracy.
Roman Law and Government
Later, Rome followed Greece's example by establishing a form of democratic government. The Roman Republic was created in 509 BC. Each year Romans elected officials to rale the city. These officials had many powers, but
Democracy and Republic	
Direct democracies and republics are similar forms of government	^1^^ in which the people rule. There are some slight differences, though.	
Direct Democracy	Republic
•	Every citizen votes on every issue. •	Ideas are debated at an assembly of all citizens.	•	Citizens elect representatives to vote on issues. •	Ideas are debated at an assembly of representatives.
THE IMPACT
TODAY
they only stayed in power for one year. This early republic was not a democracy. Later, the Romans changed their government into one with three parts. These three parts were made up of elected representatives who protected the city and its residents.
Roman laws were written and kept on public display so all people could know them. Roman concepts of equality before the law and innocent until proven guilty protected Roman citizens' rights.
The political ideas of Greece and Rome survived to influence governments around the world, including that of the United States. In the U.S. political system, citizens vote for representatives, making the nation a democratic republic.
READING CHECK
Many ot the geometry rules we learn in school today come straight from the Greek mathematician Euclid. Many doctors recite the Hippocratic Oath, named after the Greek doctor Hippocrates.
Analyzing How did Roman and Greek governments influence the United States?
Academic
Vocabulary
classical
referring to the cultures of ancient Greece or Rome
Middle Ages
As the Roman Empire fell, groups from the north and east moved into former Roman lands. By the early 500s Europe was divided into many small kingdoms. This marked the beginning of the Middle Ages, a period that lasted about a thousand years.
Feudalism
In the 480s a powerful group called the Franks conquered Gaul, the region we now call France. The Franks created a huge empire in Europe. When invaders began to attack European settlements in the 800s, the Frankish kings could not defend their empire. Because they could not depend on protection from their kings, nobles had to defend their own lands. As a result, the power of European nobles grew, and kings became less powerful. Although these nobles remained loyal to the king, they ruled their lands as independent territories.
Nobles needed soldiers to defend their lands. Nobles gave knights, warriors who fought on horseback, land in exchange for military service. Nobles who gave land to
knights so that the knights would defend the land were called lords. A knight who promised to support the noble in battle was called a vassal. This system of promises between lords and vassals is known as feudalism.
Peasants owned no land, so they were not part of the feudal system. They did, however, need to grow food to live. As a result, a new economic system developed. Knights allowed peasants to farm land on their large estates, called manors. In return, the peasants had to give the knights food or other goods as payment.
Because of its structure, feudalism promoted the separation of territories and people. The Catholic Church, however, served as a strong unifying force among the states and people of Europe. During the Middle Ages, nearly everyone in Europe was Christian. Life revolved around the local church with markets, festivals, and religious ceremonies. The Crusades
In the late 1000s, a long series of wars called the Crusades began between the European Christians and Muslims in Southwest Asia.
Time Line
Key Events in Europe
AD 455 The
Vandals sack Rome.
800 Charlemagne is crowned emperor of the Holy Roman Empire.

4 CHAPTER 1
The Turks had captured Palestine, the Holy Land where Jesus had lived. Christians no longer felt safe to travel there on pilgrimages. Christians were called upon to go to war with the Turks to recapture Palestine.
Although the Crusades failed, they changed Europe forever. Trade between Europe and Asia began to grow, introducing Europeans to new products such as apricots, rice, and cotton cloth, as well as the ideas of Muslim thinkers.
Travel, Trade, and Towns
In the Middle Ages, towns were small. After about 1000, this situation began to change. New technology meant farmers could produce larger harvests. As farmers grew more food, the population increased.
Travel became safer as increased protection from stronger rulers kept larger territories secure. Over time, kingdoms became nationstates—organized political units with central governments. This development provided even more protection to merchants.
The rulers of the Mongols made routes like the Silk Road, a caravan route that started in China and ended at the Mediterranean Sea,
safe for travelers and traders. Among these traders was Marco Polo. In 1271 he journeyed from Europe to China along part of the old Silk Road. He spent 20 years living and traveling in Asia. When Marco Polo returned to Europe, he brought back stories of spices, coal, and paper money.
Trade routes spread all across Europe. Merchants brought goods from Asia and Africa to sell in European markets. Their ships also brought back rats infected with the plague. The disease, known as the Black Death, spread across Europe, killing an estimated 25 million people. The European economy was dramatically affected by the shortage of workers. Peasants and serfs could now demand payment for their labor. They began to move to cities, which began to grow in size.
In time, the growth of trade led to the decline of feudalism and the manor system. A new middle class of artisans and merchants emerged, and trade cities became commercial centers. Trade associations called guilds became an influential part of European life.
READING CHECK
Drawing Conclusions How
did travel and trade affect the feudal system?
THE WORLD BEFORE THE OPENING OF THE ATLANTIC 25
Renaissance
The Renaissance period brought new ways of thinking to Europe, weakening the old feudal system even more. The word Renaissance means "rebirth" and refers to the period that followed the Middle Ages in Europe. This movement began in Italy and eventually spread to other parts of Europe.
During the Renaissance, European rulers began to increase their power over the nobles in their countries. Fewer invasions from outside forces helped bring a period of order and stability to Europe.
Search for Knowledge
Love of art and education was a key feature of the Renaissance. As Turks conquered much of the Byzantine Empire in the East, scholars fled to Italy. They brought ancient classical writings with them. Some of the works were by Greek thinkers like Plato.
Excited by the discoveries brought by Turkish scholars, European scholars went looking for ancient texts in Latin. They discovered many Latin texts in monasteries, which had preserved works by Roman writers. As Italian scholars read these ancient texts, they rediscovered the glories of Greece and Rome.
The search for knowledge and learning spread to all fields, including art, literature, science, and political thought. The Renaissance emphasized the importance of people rather than focusing on religion. This new focus on human value and the study of humanities was called humanism. People's interest in the humanities led them to respect those who could write, create, or speak well. During the Middle Ages, most people had worked only to glorify God.
Italian artists created some of the most beautiful paintings and sculptures in the world. Their art reflected the basic Renaissance idea—the value of human beings. Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci are two of the greatest Renaissance artists. They are known for their work in painting, sculpture, and architecture. Da Vinci was also an inventor, engineer, and mapmaker.
Italian writers also penned great works of literature. Dante Alighieri was a politician and poet. Before Dante, most authors wrote in Latin, the language of the church. But Dante chose to write in Italian, the common language of the people. This gave ordinary people the opportunity to read Dante's work.
Many texts that Europeans rediscovered in the 1300s dealt with science. After reading these works, Renaissance scholars went on
» CHAPTER 1
to make their own scientific advances. They also studied ancient math texts and built on the ideas they read about. For example, they created symbols for the square root and for positive and negative numbers. Astronomers discovered that Earth moves around the sun. Other scientists used measurements and made calculations to create better, more accurate maps.
The development of the printing press was a giant step forward in spreading new ideas. In the mid-1400s, a German man, Johannes Gutenberg (GooT-uhn-berk), developed a printing press that used movable type. This allowed an entire page to be printed at. once. For the first time in history, thousands of people could read the same books and share ideas about them.
Economic Changes Affect Trade
The growth in trade and services at the beginning of the Renaissance sparked a commercial revolution. This also brought a rise in mercantilism. Mercantilism is an economic system that unifies and increases the power and wealth of a nation.
Four northern Italian cities, Florence, Genoa, Milan, and Venice, developed into important trading centers. These cities played two major roles in trade. They served as ports along the Mediterranean Sea. They also served as manufacturing centers and specialized in certain crafts. This economic activity made some families in these cities very wealthy.
As trade and commerce grew, the need for banks arose. Bankers in Florence, Italy, kept money for merchants from all over Europe. The bankers also made money by charging interest on funds they loaned to merchants. The greatest bankers in Florence were from the Medici family. Although Florence was already wealthy from trade, banking increased that wealth.
During this time, merchants began to create joint-stock companies, or businesses in which a group of people invest together. In
a joint-stock company, the investors share in the companies' profits and losses. Forming joint-stock companies allowed investors to take fewer risks.
reading Check
Drawing Conclusions How
did the Renaissance lead to trade and a commercial revolution?
I
Summary and Preview Greek and I Roman traditions provided new ways for people to govern themselves. In the next chapter you will read about how the Renaissance paved the way for exploration of the Americas.
THE IMPACT
TODAY
The demand for more books led to improvements in printing and binding that have made modern books affordable.
f
ij
Section 4 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What is the difference between a direct democracy and a republic?
b. Elaborate What is the importance of having a written law code?
2.	a. Describe What is the relationship between knights and nobles?
b. Elaborate How did the Crusades affect the feudal system?
3.	a. Identify What does the term Renaissance mean?
b.	Analyze What is the relationship among trade, banking, and joint-stock companies?
c.	Elaborate What do you think was the greatest accomplishment of the Renaissance?
Critical Thinking
4.	Supporting a Point of View Review your notes on the major changes that took place in Europe during the periods discussed in the section. In a chart like the one below, identify which period you think was most important, and explain why.
Most Important	Why
	
^WriteSmart
5. Organizing a Chronology Make a list of important events in Europe during the time discussed in this section. Reorder them from earliest to most recent.
THE WORLD BEFORE THE OPENING OF THE ATLANTIC 27
History and Geography

"And they died by the hundreds," wrote one man who saw the horror, "both day and night."The Black Death had arrived. The Black Death was a series of deadly plagues that hit Europe between 1347 and 1351, killing millions. People didn't know what caused the plague. They also didn't know that geography played a key role in its spread—as people traveled to trade, they unknowingly carried the disease with them to new places.







.dH

The fleas carry the plague and jump onto a man unloading the ship. Soon, he will get sick and die.

BBS®




sifiiw


:,13W



The plague is so terrifying that many people think it's the end of the world. They leave town for the country, spreading the Black Death even further.
People dig mass graves to bury the dead. Often, so many people are infected that there is no one left to bury them.
The garbage and dirty conditions in the town provide food and a home for the rats, allowing disease to spread even more.
z
So many people die so quickly that special carts are sent through the streets to gather the bodies.
GEOGRAPHY
SKILLS! INTERPRETING MAPS
1.	Movement How did the Black Death reach Europe from Asia?
2.	Human-Environment Interaction What helped spread the plague throughout Europe?
Social Studies Skills
Analysis	Critical Thinking o	.
’	3 Participation
Study
Interpreting Diagrams
Understand the Skill
w
Diagrams are drawings that use lines and labels to explain or illustrate something. Different types of diagrams have different purposes. Pictorial diagrams show an object in simple form, much like it would look if you were viewing it. Cutaway diagrams show the "insides" of an object. Component diagrams show how an object is organized by separating it into parts. Such diagrams are sometimes also called schematic drawings. The ability to interpret diagrams will help you to better understand a historical object, its function, and how it worked.
Learn the Skill
Use these basic steps to interpret a diagram:
1.	Determine what type of diagram it is.
2.	Read the diagram's title or caption to find out what the diagram represents.
3.	Look for any labels and read them carefully. Most diagrams include text that identifies the object's parts or explains relationships between the parts.
4.	If a legend is present, study it to identify and understand any symbols and colors that are used in the diagram.
5.	Look for numbers or letters that might indicate a sequence of steps. Also, look for any arrows that might show direction or movement.
An Early Castle
Practice and Apply the Skill
Interpret the diagram of an early castle, and answer the following questions.
1.	What type of diagram is this?
2.	What labels in the diagram suggest how the castle was heated?
3.	What was the purpose of the pulley?
4.	Of what materials was the castle made?
5.	What features of the castle helped make it secure against attack?
>0 CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER
Chapter Review
Visual Summary
The Americas and the Old World each had complex societies, trade routes, and economies.
Reviewing Vocabulary,
Terms, and People
Complete each sentence by filling in the blank with the correct term or person.
1.	During the Ice Age, a narrow strip of land called
the______________was exposed.
2.	The____________of Paleo-Indians from North
to South America took thousands of years.
3.	Native Americans living in the Pacific Northwest carved_______________on tall poles.
4.	The first political confederation of Native Americans in North America was the__________.
5.	The most famous ruler of Mali was______.
6.	While Mali's leader was on a________, or
pilgrimage, to Mecca, he introduced his empire to the world.
7.	The most famous ruler of Songhai took the
name_______________.
8.	____________describes an ideal society based
on justice in Republic.
Comprehension and
Critical Thinking
SECTION 1 (Pages 6-9)
9.	a. Describe How did early peoples in the Americas get their food?
b.	Analyze What led to the development of different culture groups in the Americas?
c.	Elaborate What features did the early civilizations of Mesoamerica and South America have in common?
SECTION 2 (Pages 10-15)
10.	a. Identify Which early Native American society built cliff dwellings, and which built mounds?
b.	Analyze How did Native Americans' religious beliefs affect their lives in North America?
c.	Evaluate Do you think it was easier for Native Americans to live in the dry climates of the Southwest, where rainfall was unpredictable, or in the North, where the cold climate presented a constant challenge?
THE WORLD BEFORE THE OPENING OF THE ATLANTIC 31
SECTION 3 (Pages 16-20)
11.	a. Describe How did geography contribute to Ghana's wealth?
b.	Compare What characteristics did Mansa Musa and Askia the Great have in common?
c.	Elaborate How did West Africa develop a large slave-trade network?
SECTION 4 (Pages 22-27)
12.	a. Recall What role did Greek and Roman traditions play in the development of the United States?
b.	Summarize How did the Crusades in Southwest Asia and the travels of Marco Polo in Asia contribute to the growth of trade in Europe?
c.	Evaluate Which do you think contributed the most to the advances in learning that occurred during the Renaissance—writing in the common language of a people or inventing the printing press?
Reviewing Themes
13.	Geography How did changes in climate lead to migration to the Americas?
14.	Economics Describe the development of the European economy during the Middle Ages.
Using the Internet
15.	Activity: Compare and Contrast What causes large groups of people to migrate? Factors that influence why people migrate can be labeled as "push" and "pull." For example, lack of resources "pushed" Paleo-Indians from Asia, while herds of animals "pulled" Paleo-Indians to North America. Through your online textbook, compare and contrast push-pull factors involved in Paleo-Indian migration with the factors influencing immigration to the United States today. Create an illustrated chart to display your research.
Reading Skills
Specialized Vocabulary of Social Studies Use the Reading Skills taught in this chapter to answer the question below.
16.	Write five sentences using the vocabulary words on page 4. Choose three from the first list and two from the second. Each sentence should define the term.

Social Studies Skills Owirr
Interpreting Diagrams Use the Social Studies Skills taught in this chapter to answer the question below.
17.	Look back at the diagram on page 30. Which of the following is the main way to enter the castle?
a.	well
b.	moat
c.	drawbridge
d.	windows
"’J'WriteSmart
18. Writing Your Travelogue. You have read about many cultures across a long span of history. Pick one area that you found the most interesting in the chapter. Organize your thoughts about the kinds of people you would have met and the kind of things you would have done if you had traveled there during the time discussed.
Try to include information about a culture's history, customs, beliefs, practices, economies, political systems, and natural environments. Write a paragraph about what you might have liked or disliked about your trip. Be sure to include a main idea sentence and several sentences that support the main idea with evidence.
Whmhsocialstudiescom |
2 CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER
Texas Test Practice
DIRECTIONS:
Read each question and write the letter of the best response. 1	Before the arrival of Europeans, the most advanced Native American societies were located in what is now
A
California. B the eastern United States.
C the American Southwest.
D
Mexico. 2	The trade in gold, salt, and slaves is closely related to
F the Inca Empire.
G the Roman Empire.
H
West Africa. J the Renaissance.
3	Which of the following statements best describes the cause of increased trade between Europe and Asia in the late Middle Ages?
A
The interruption of trade caused by the Crusades led many merchants to travel to Asia in search of trade partners. B
European merchants traded with Asia due to a lack of valuable natural resources in Europe. C
The growth of towns during the Middle Ages led to an increased demand for Asian trade goods. D
Marco Polo’s stories of Asia’s great wealth led many Europeans to seek out Asian goods. 4	How did the societies of North America differ from those of Central and South America?
F
Societies in North America did not create political units like those in Central and South America. G
North American culture groups lacked the diversity of those in Central and South America. H
North American societies were significantly more advanced than those to the south. J
Culture groups in North America worshipped many gods, while those in Central and South America were monotheistic. 5	A result of Johannes Gutenberg’s printing press was that
A the Renaissance began.
B more people could read the same books and share ideas.
C
European trade and commerce grew. D overseas trade and travel became more popular.
6	The exposure of a land bridge between Asia and present-day Alaska during the last Ice Age resulted in
F the introduction of new plants and animals to Asia and Europe.
G the development of farming in the Americas.
H the migration of people into the Americas.
J the establishment of advanced cultures in North America.
7	Examine the following passage by Marco Polo about his travels through China. Then answer the question that follows.
Z/Upon leaving Ta-in-fu, we traveled for seven days through a fine county in which there were many cities, where commerce and manufactures [goods] prevailed. We reached a large city named Pi-an-fu, which is very famous. Like Ta-in-fu, this city contains numerous merchants and artisans. Silk is produced here also in great quantity/'
—Marco Polo, from the Travels of Marco Polo: The Venetian
Document-Based Question What is the main idea of this passage?
THE WORLD BEFORETHE OPENING OF THE ATLANTIC 33
MULTIMEDIA CONNECTIONS
CLICK THROUGH
IIIRWWUII
X INTER ACTIVITIES
hmhsocialstudies.com
The Maya developed one of the most advanced civilizations in the Americas, but their story is shrouded in mystery.
Around a.d. 250, the Maya began to build great cities in southern Mexico and Central America. They developed a writing system, practiced astronomy, and built magnificent palaces and pyramids with little more than stone tools. Around a.d. 900, however, the Maya abandoned their cities, leaving their monuments to be reclaimed by the jungle and, for a time, forgotten.
Explore some of the incredible monuments and cultural achievements of the ancient Maya online. You can find a wealth of information, video clips, primary sources, and more at
(■ill
ilffbg
UH
Destroying the Maya's Past Watch the video to learn how the actions of one Spanish missionary nearly destroyed the written record of the Maya world.
X hmhsocialstudies.com

*1


"Thus let it be done!
Let the emptiness be filled! Let the water recede and make a void, let the earth appear and become solid; let it be done . . . "Earth!" they said, and instantly it was made."
eH Finding the City of Palenque
Watch the video to learn about the great Maya city of Palenque and the European discovery of the site in the eighteenth century.
■..TO.


pb The Popol Vuh
Read the document to learn how the Maya believed the world was created.
Pakal's Tomb
Watch the video to explore how the discovery of the tomb of a great king helped archaeologists piece together the Maya past.
THE MAYA 33 MC2
’’’^WriteSmart
I IIS UUI
X-'fJV.UI IJ I Ul V.V.VI IIIIIIIWIIJWI .111 IX.VII I UIVI V > » VW III their colonies.
s on Writing
Writing a Letter Long before telephones and e-mails, most people communicated with friends and family far away by letter. As you read this chapter, you will learn about different groups of people who came to the Americas. You will pretend to be a member of one of these groups and write a letter home to tell your friends and family about the people you meet and the experiences you have in the Americas.
