342 CHAPTER 11
World
To reach the West many pioneers made the six-month journey along the Oregon Trail. Amazing natural beauty rewarded the travelers for the dangers and obstacles they faced, as painter Albert Bierstadt showed in his work Emigrants Crossing the Plains.
1827
The United States and Great Britain agree to continue joint occupation of Oregon Country.
1846
The United States declares war against Mexico.
1848
Gold is discovered in California on January 24.
1830 L
1840
1830 I
1821
Mexico wins its independence from Spain.
1838
Californios revolt unsuccessfully against the Mexican government.

1842
China gives Great Britain control of the island of Kong Kong.
1854
Commodore Matthew Perry negotiates a trade treaty with Japan.
_ 1820
EXPANDING WEST 343
Reading Social Studies
Economics
Geography
Politics
Society and Culture
Science and Technology
Focus on Themes In this chapter you will read about the American people as they continued to move west. You will find out about the famous Oregon and Santa Fe trails, Texas's fight for independence from Mexico, and Mexico's war with the United
States. Finally, you will read about the California gold rush that brought thousands of people west. As you read each section, you will see how economic issues affected the growth of different geographic areas.
----------------------------■■ ■-............:.. ..................
Comparing Historical Texts
FOCUS on Reading A good way to learn what people in the past thought is to read what they wrote. However, most documents will only tell you one side of the story. By comparing writings by different people, you can learn a great deal about various sides of a historical issue or debate.
Comparing Texts When you compare historical texts, you should consider two things: who wrote the documents and what the documents were meant to achieve. To do this, you need to find the writers' main point or points.
Document 1
Document 2
5 "When in the Course of human events, it « j becomes necessary for one people to dissolve i j the political bands which have connected them 5 | with another, and to assume among the powers J i of the earth, the separate and equal station to 1 I which the Laws of Nature and of Nature's God
I entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the 1 causes which impel them to the separation." i	—U.S. Declaration of Independence, July 4,1776 i
X-----------h
"When a government has ceased to protect the lives, liberty and property of the people, from whom its legitimate powers are derived, and for the advancement of whose happiness it was instituted, and so far from being a guarantee for the enjoyment of those inestimable and inalienable rights, becomes an instrument in the hands of evil rulers for their oppression."
—Texas Declaration of Independence, March 2,1836
Document 1
Document 2
Writer
Continental Congress	Delegates of the People of Texas in Convention
Main point	
The British colonies have the right to separate themselves from the British government.	The Mexican government has ceased to protect the rights of Texas residents.
Both Sides of the Issue	
American and Texan colonists both chose to declare their independence from governments that they felt were not protecting their rights and interests.
344 CHAPTER 11
You Try It!
Read the following passages about views of the Texas annexation. As you read, look for the main point each man makes in his writing.
Foreign Policy
The proof is clear and satisfactory to my mind, that Texas once constituted a part of the territory of the United States, the title to which I regard to have been as indisputable as that to any other portion of our territory.
—James Polk, April23,1844
But are we perfectly sure that we should be free from injury in a state of war with Mexico? Have we any security that countless numbers of foreign vessels under the authority and flag of Mexico would not prey upon our defenceless commerce in the Mexican gulf, on the Pacific ocean, and on every other sea and ocean? What commerce, on the other hand, does Mexico offer as an indemnity for our losses to the gallantry and enterprise of our countrymen?
—Henry Clay, April 17,1844
After you read the passages, answer the following questions.
1.	What was the main point Polk made in his speech?
2.	What was the main point Clay made in his letter?
3.	How can a comparison of Polk's and Clay's views help you understand the issues that shaped Americans' view of Texas and Mexico in the mid-1800s?
Chapter 11
Section 1
John Jacob Astor (p. 346} mountain men (p. 346)
Oregon Trail (p. 348}
Santa Fe Trail Ip. 349}
Mormons (p. 349)
Brigham Young (p. 349}
Section 2
Father Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla (p. 350)
empresarios ip. 350)
Stephen F. Austin (p. 351}
Antonio Ldpez de Santa Anna ip. 351) Alamo (p. 352)
Battle of San Jacinto Ip. 352)
Section 3
manifest destiny ip. 355}
James K. Polk (p. 355) vaqueros Ip. 357)
Californios (p. 357)
Bear Flag Revolt (p. 358)
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (p. 361) Gadsden Purchase (p. 361)
Section 4
John Sutter ip. 365)
Donner party (p. 365)
forty-niners (p. 365)
prospect (p. 366)
placer miners (p. 366)
Academic Vocabulary
Success in school is related to knowing academic vocabulary— the words that are frequently used in school assignments and discussions. In this chapter, you will learn the following academic words:
explicit (p. 351) element Ip. 357)
As you read Chapter 11, organize your notes to help you point out the similarities and differences among events or policies.

EXPANDING WEST
Reading Social Studies
Economics
Geography
Politics
Society and Culture
Science and Technology

Focus on Themes In this chapter you will read about the American people as they continued to move west. You will find out about the famous Oregon and Santa Fe trails, Texas's fight for independence from Mexico, and Mexico's war with the United
States. Finally, you will read about the California gold rush that brought thousands of people west. As you read each section, you will see how economic issues affected the growth of different geographic areas.
Comparing Historical Texts
FOCUS
On Reading A good way to learn what people in the past thought is to read what they wrote. However, most documents will only tell you one side of the story. By comparing writings by different people, you can learn a great deal about various sides of a historical issue or debate. Document 1
X'--- —	-
j "When in the Course of human events, it i becomes necessary for one people to dissolve | the political bands which have connected them ; with another, and to assume among the powers i of the earth, the separate and equal station to ; which the Laws of Nature and of Nature's God | entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of i mankind requires that they should declare the j causes which impel them to the separation."
—U.S. Declaration of Independence, July 4,1776
Comparing Texts When you compare historical texts, you should consider two things: who wrote the documents and what the documents were meant to achieve. To do this, you need to find the writers' main point or points.
Document 2
! "When a government has ceased to protect the lives, liberty and property of the people, from whom its legitimate powers are derived, and for the advancement
, of whose happiness it was instituted, and I so far from being a guarantee for the enjoyment of those inestimable and inalienable rights, becomes an instrument in the
hands of evil rulers for their oppression."
—Texas Declaration of Independence, March 2,1836
....-...
V

Document 1
Writer
Document 2
Continental Congress
Delegates of the People of Texas in Convention
Main point
The British colonies have the right to separate themselves from the British government.
The Mexican government has ceased to protect the rights of Texas residents.
Both Sides of the Issue
American and Texan colonists both chose to declare their independence from governments that they felt were not protecting their rights and interests.
344 CHAPTER 11
Vou Try It!
Read the following passages about views of the Texas annexation. As you read, look for the main point each man makes in his writing.

Foreign Policy
The proof is clear and satisfactory to my mind, that Texas once constituted a part of the territory of the United States, the title to which I regard to have been as indisputable as that to any other portion of our territory.
—James Polk, April23,1844
But are we perfectly sure that we should be free from injury in a state of war with Mexico? Have we any security that countless numbers of foreign vessels under the authority and flag of Mexico would not prey upon our defenceless commerce in the Mexican gulf, on the Pacific ocean, and on every other sea and ocean? What commerce, on the other hand, does Mexico offer as an indemnity for our losses to the gallantry and enterprise of our countrymen?
—Henry Clay, April 17,1844
After you read the passages, answer the following questions.
1.	What was the main point Polk made in his speech?
2.	What was the main point Clay made in his letter?
3.	How can a comparison of Polk's and Clay's views help you understand the issues that shaped Americans' view of Texas and Mexico in the mid-1800s?
Chapter 11
Section 1
John Jacob Astor (p. 346) mountain men Ip. 346)
Oregon Trail Ip. 348)
Santa Fe Trail Ip, 349)
Mormons Ip. 349)
Brigham Young Ip. 349)
Section 2
Father Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla (p. 350)
empresarios (p. 350)
Stephen F. Austin (p. 351)
Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna (p. 351) Alamo (p. 352)
Battle of San Jacinto (p. 352)
Section 3
manifest destiny Ip. 355)
James K. Polk Ip. 355) vaqueros Ip. 357)
Californios Ip. 357)
Bear Flag Revolt Ip. 358)
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (p. 361) Gadsden Purchase Ip. 361)
Section 4
John Sutter (p. 365)
Donner party (p. 365)
forty-niners Ip. 365)
prospect Ip. 366)
placer miners Ip. 366)
Academic Vocabulary
Success in school is related to knowing academic vocabulary— the words that are frequently used in school assignments and discussions. In this chapter, you will learn the following academic words:
explicit (p. 351) element (p. 357)
As you road Chapter 11, organize your notes to help you point out the similarities and differences among events or policies.
EXPANDING WEST 34
TEKS 1A, 6E, 10A, 10B, IOC, 11A, 12A, 12D, 23A, 23D
Trai Is to the West
What You Will Learn...
1.	During the early 1800s, Americans moved west of the Rocky Mountains to settle and trade.
2.	The Mormons traveled west in search of religious freedom.
T
The American West attracted a variety of settlers.
Key Terms and People
John Jacob Astor, p. 346 mountain men, p. 346 Oregon Trail, p. 348 Santa Fe Trail, p. 349 Mormons, p. 349 Brigham Young, p. 349
hmhsocialstudies.com
SB
Use the annotation tools in your eBook to take notes on the different groups that settled in the American West, the trails they took, and their motives for moving West.
If YOU were there...
You live in Ohio in 1840. A few months ago, you and your family heard stories about a wonderful land in the Northwest, with sparkling rivers and fertile valleys. You all decide to pull up stakes and head West. You travel to Independence, Missouri, planning to join a wagon train on the Oregon Trail. In Missouri, you're surprised to find hundreds of other people planning to make the trip.
What would you expect your journey West to be like?
BUILDING BACKGROUND
Many Americans in the Jacksonian Era were restless, curious, and eager to be on the move. The American West drew a variety of settlers. Some looked for wealth and adventure. Others, like this family on its way to the Northwest, dreamed of rich farmland and new homes. Americans Move West
In the early 1800s, Americans pushed steadily westward, moving even beyond the territory of the United States. They traveled by canoe and flatboat, on horseback, and by wagon train. Some even walked much of the way. The era of westward expansion lasted until the late 1800s.
The rush to the West occurred, in part, because of a hat. The "high hat," made of water-repellent beaver fur, was popular in the United States and Europe. While acquiring fur for the hats, French, British, and American companies gradually killed off the beaver population in the East. Companies moved west in search of more beavers. Most of the first non-Native Americans who traveled to the Rocky Mountains and the Pacific Northwest were fur traders and trappers.
American merchant John Jacob Astor created one of the largest fur businesses, the American Fur Company. His company bought skins from western fur traders and trappers who became known as mountain men. These adventurers were some of the first easterners to explore and map the Rocky Mountains and lands west of them. Mountain men lived lonely and often dangerous lives. They trapped animals on their own, far from towns and settlements. Mountain men such as Jedediah Smith, Manuel Lisa, Jim Bridger, and Jim
346 CHAPTER 11
1.	Movement Which trails took the longest to travel?
2.	Human-Environment Interaction What difficulties do you think travelers on the trails faced?
Beckwourth survived many hardships during their search for wealth and adventure. To survive on the frontier, mountain men adopted Native American customs and clothing. In addition, they often married Native American women. The Indian wives of trappers often worked hard to contribute to their success.
Pioneer William Ashley saw that frequently bringing furs out of the Rocky Mountains was expensive. He asked his traders to stay in the mountains and meet once a year to trade and socialize. This practice helped make the fur trade more profitable. The yearly meeting was known as the rendezvous. At the rendezvous, mountain men and Native American trappers sold their fur to fur-company agents. It was thus important to bring as many furs as possible. One trapper described the people at a typical rendezvous in 1837. He saw Americans, Canadian French, some Europeans, and "Indians, of nearly every tribe in the Rocky Mountains."
The rendezvous was filled with celebrating and storytelling. At the same time, the meeting was also about conducting business. Western artist Alfred Jacob Miller described how trade was begun in the rendezvous camp.
^The Fur Company's great tent is raised; the Indians erect their picturesque [beautiful] white lodges; the accumulated [collected] furs of the hunting season are brought forth and the Company's tent is a... busy place.
—Alfred Jacob Miller, quoted In The Fur Trade of the American West, by David J. Wlshart
In 1811, John Jacob Astor founded a furtrading post called Astoria at the mouth of the Columbia River. Astoria was one of the first American settlements in what became known as Oregon Country. American Indians occupied the region, which was rich in forests, rivers, and wildlife. However, Britain, Russia, Spain, and the United States all claimed the land. The United States based its claim on
EXPANDING WEST 3<
the exploration of merchant captain Robert Gray, who had reached the mouth of the Columbia River in 1792.
Recognizing the huge economic value of the Pacific Northwest, the United States made treaties in which Spain and Russia gave up their claims to various areas. The United States also signed treaties w?1' Britain allowing both countries to occupy Oregon Country, the Columbia River, and its surrounding lands.
By the 1840s, the era of American fur trading in the Pacific Northwest was drawing to a close. The demand for beaver furs had fallen because fashions changed. Too much trapping had also greatly reduced the number of beavers. Some mountain men gave up their work and moved back east. Their daring stories, however, along with the treaties made by the U.S. government, inspired other Americans to move West. Lured by rich resources and a mild climate, easterners poured into Oregon Country in the 1840s. These new settlers soon replaced the mountain men on the frontier.
The Oregon Trail
Many settlers moving to Oregon Country and other western areas followed the 2,000-mile-long Oregon Trail, which stretched from places such as Independence, Missouri, or Council Bluffs, Iowa, west into Oregon Country. The trail followed the Platte and Sweetwater Rivers over the Plains. After it crossed the Rocky Mountains, the trail forked. The northern branch led to the Willamette Valley in Oregon. The other branch went to California and became known as the California Trail.
Traveling the trail challenged the strength and determination of pioneer families. The journey usually began after the rainy season ended in late spring and lasted about six months. The cost, about $600 for a family of four, was high at a time when a typical worker usually made about $1.50 per day. Young families made up most groups of settlers. They gathered in wagon trains for the trip. There could be as few as 10 wagons or as many as several dozen in a wagon train.
The wagons were pulled by oxen, mules, or horses. Pioneers often walked to save their animals' strength. They kept up a tiring pace, traveling from dawn until dusk. Settler Jesse Applegate recalled the advice he received from one experienced Oregon pioneer: "Travel, travel, TRAVEL . . . Nothing is good that causes a moment's delay."
Some pioneers brought small herds of cattle with them on the trail. They faced severe hardships, including shortages of food, supplies, and water. Rough weather and geographic barriers, such as rivers and mountains, sometimes forced large numbers of pioneers to abandon their wagons. In the early days of the Oregon Trail, many Native Americans helped the pioneers, acting as guides and messengers. They also traded goods for food. Although newspapers sometimes reported Native American "massacres" of pioneers, few settlers died from Indian attacks.
The settlers who arrived safely in Oregon and California found generally healthy
348 CHAPTER 11
and pleasant climates. By 1845 some 5,000 settlers occupied the Willamette Valley.
The Santa Fe Trail
The Santa Fe Trail was another important path west. It led from Independence, Missouri, to Santa Fe, New Mexico. It followed an ancient trading route first used by Native Americans. American traders loaded their wagon trains with cloth and other manufactured goods to exchange for horses, mules, and silver from Mexican traders in Santa Fe.
The long trip across blazing deserts and rough mountains was dangerous. But the lure of high profits encouraged traders to take to the trail. One trader reported a 2,000 percent profit on his cargo. The U.S. government helped protect traders by sending troops to ensure that Native Americans were not a threat.
three communities eventually failed, and an anti-Mormon mob murdered Smith in 1844. Following Smith's murder, Brigham Young became head of the Mormon Church. Young chose what is now Utah as the group's new home, and thousands of Mormons took the Mormon Trail to the area near the Great Salt Lake, where they prospered. By 1860 there were about 40,000 Mormons in Utah.
READING CHECK
Finding Main Ideas Why did
Mormons move west?
I
Summary and Preview some of the I first Americans to move West were fur traders and trappers. Settlers soon followed. In the next section you will learn about the Texas Revolution.
Reading Check a
Contrasting How were the Oregon and Santa Fe trails different?
Section 1 Assessment
Mormons Travel West
One large group of settlers traveled to the West in search of religious freedom. In 1830 a young man named Joseph Smith founded the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in western New York. The members of Joseph Smith's church became known as Mormons. Smith told his followers that he had found and translated a set of golden tablets containing religious teachings. The writings were called the Book of Mormon.
Church membership grew rapidly, but certain beliefs and practices caused Mormons to be persecuted. For example, beginning in the 1850s some Mormon men practiced polygamy—a practice in which one man is married to several women at the same time. This practice was outlawed by the church in 1890.
In the early 1830s Smith and his growing number of converts left New York. They formed new communities, first in Ohio, then in Missouri, and finally in Illinois. All
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People 1. a. Identify What was the Oregon Trail? Who used it?
b. Elaborate Would you have chosen to leave your home
Ito travel west? Why?
2. a. Identify Who are the Mormons?
b. Summarize What difficulties led Mormons to move | to Utah?
S
Critical Thinking I 3. Drawing Conclusions Review your notes on early Ameri-i can settlement in the West. Then copy the chart below
and use it to identify challenges of the trip that western travelers faced.
Travelers	Challenges Faced
	
	
	
"’J'WriteSmart
4. Describing Trails West Make a list noting important topics that you might want to cover in your documentary film. In addition, write down ideas about how you might present information about each topic. For example, will you use a narrator to tell the life story of Joseph Smith, or will you have actors present it dramatically?
EXPANDING WEST 3‘

SECTION
2
TEKS 1 A, 6E, 10A, 10B, IOC, 11 A, 11B, 12D, 23D
What You Will Learn...
1.	Many American settlers moved to Texas after Mexico achieved independence from Spain.
2.	Texans revolted against Mexican rule and established an independent nation.
In 1836, Texas gained its independence from Mexico.
The Texes Revolution
If YOU were there...
You are the father of a large farm family in Missouri. There is not enough land for everyone, so you're looking for another opportunity. One day, a Mexican government official comes to town. He is looking for people to settle in Texas. The Mexican government is offering generous tracts of land to colonists. However, you have to become a citizen of Mexico and follow Mexican laws.
Would you decide to move your family to Texas? Why?
Key Terms and People
Father Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla, p. 350
empresarios, p. 350
Stephen F. Austin, p. 351 Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna, p. 351 Alamo, p. 352
Battle of San Jacinto, p. 352
BUILDING BACKGROUND
What do you already know about the history of Texas? Many towns in Texas have streets or neighborhoods named after early settlers and heros of the Texas Revolution. Travis, Austin, Bowie, and Houston are all early Texas heros. Use the knowledge you already have about Texas and Texas history to help you understand this section. hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES
Use the annotation tools in your eBook to take notes on the events that led to the independence of Texas.
American Settlers Move to Texas
Mexico had a long, unprotected border that stretched from Texas to California. Mexico's Spanish rulers worried constantly about attacks from neighbors. They also were concerned about threats from within Mexico.
Their fears were justified. Mexicans moved to overthrow Spanish rule in the early 1800s. In September 1810 Father Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla, a Mexican priest, led a rebellion of about 80,000 poor Indians and mestizos, or people of Indian and Spanish ancestry. They hoped that if Mexico became independent from the Spanish monarchy, their lives would improve.
Hidalgo's revolt failed, but the rebellion he started grew. In 1821 Mexico became independent. In 1824 it adopted a republican constitution that declared rights for all Mexicans. The new Mexican government contracted with empresarios, or agents, to bring settlers to Texas. They paid the agents in land.
350 CHAPTER 11
In 1821 one young agent, Stephen F. Austin, started a Texas colony on the lower Colorado River. The first 300 families became known as the Old Three Hundred. Austin's successful colony attracted other agents, and American settlers flocked to the region. The Anglo-American settlers became known as Texians and were often Protestant. The Mexican residents were called Tejanos, and were usually Catholic. The two groups lived in separate communities, but eventually Texas developed a culture that was distinct from the rest of Mexico as well as the United States.
In exchange for free land, settlers had to obey Mexican laws. But some settlers often explicitly ignored these laws. For example, despite the ban on slavery, many brought slaves. Concerned that it was losing control of the growing American population, Mexico responded. In 1830, it banned further settlement by Americans. Angry about the new law, many Texans began to think of gaining independence from Mexico.
Meanwhile, Mexico had come under the rule of General Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna. He soon suspended Mexico's republican constitution and turned his attention to the growing unrest in Texas.
READING CHECK
Finding Main Ideas Why did
settlers move to Texas?


mi" i‘....
Texans Revolt against Mexico
In October 1835 the Mexican army tried to remove a cannon from the town of Gonzales, Texas. Rebels stood next to the cannon. Their flag read, "Come and take it." In the following battle, the rebels won. The Texas Revolution, also known as the Texas War for Independence, had begun.
Texas Independence
On March 2, 1836, Texans declared their independence from Mexico and adopted a constitution. The new Republic of Texas was bom. Both the declaration and the constitution were modeled after the U.S. documents. The Texas constitution, however, made slavery legal.
Delegates to the new Texas government chose politician David Bumet as president and Lorenzo de Zavala as vice president. Another revolutionary, Sam Houston, was named to head the Texas army. Austin went to the United States to seek money and troops.
Academic
Vocabulary
explicit fully revealed without vagueness
EXPANDING WEST 35
HISTORY
VIDEO
Independence for Texas
711 hmhsocialstudies.com!
Battle at the Alamo
The Texans' actions angered the Mexican government. Santa Anna began assembling a force of thousands to stop the rebellion. The force included both Texians and Tejanos.
A hastily created army of Texas volunteers had been clashing with Mexican troops for months. Under Edward Burleson, a Texian force took the town of San Antonio. It then occupied the Alamo, a former mission near San Antonio that became an important battle site in the Texas Revolution. Texas settler Jim Bowie and volunteers from the United States, including frontiersman Davy Crockett joined the Alamo's defense.
The rebels, numbering about 200, hoped for reinforcements from the army that Sam Houston was assembling. For almost two weeks, from February 23 to March 6, 1836, the Texans held out against the large Mexican force. Colonel William Travis managed to get a message to other Texans through enemy lines:
I call on you in the name of Liberty, of patriotism, and everything dear to the American character, to come to our aid with all dispatch [speed]... VICTORY OR DEATH."
—William Travis, from a letter written at the Alamo, 1836
Before dawn on March 6, the Mexican army attacked. Despite heavy losses, the army overcame the Texans. All the defenders of the Alamo were killed, though some civilians survived. Following a later battle, at Goliad, Santa Anna ordered the execution of 350 prisoners who had surrendered. Texans were enraged by the killings.
Battle of San Jacinto
Santa Anna now chased the untrained forces of Sam Houston. Outnumbered, the Texans fled east. Finally, they reorganized at the San Jacinto River, near Galveston Bay. There, the Texans took a stand.
Santa Anna was confident of victory, but he was careless in choosing the site for his camp. On the afternoon of April 21, 1836, while Mexican troops were resting, Houston's forces swarmed the camp, shouting, "Remember the Alamo! Remember Goliad!"
The fighting ended swiftly. Santa Anna's army was destroyed. In the Battle of San Jacinto, the Texans captured Santa Anna and forced him to sign a treaty giving Texas its independence.
352
APTER J
An Independent Nation
Sam Houston was the hero of the new independent nation of Texas. The republic created a new town named Houston and made it the capital. Voters elected Sam Houston as president. Stephen F. Austin became secretary of state.
To increase the population, Texas offered land grants. American settlers came from nearby southern states, often bringing slaves with them to help grow and harvest cotton.
Most Texans hoped that the United States would annex, or take control of, Texas, making it a state. Some in Congress wanted to annex Texas, but President Andrew Jack-son did not pursue the issue. Although he wanted to annex the area, he was concerned that admitting Texas as a slave state would upset the fragile balance of free and slave states. The president also did not want to have a war with Mexico over Texas.
Finally, Jackson did recognize Texas as an independent nation. France did so in 1839. Britain, which wanted to halt U.S. expansion, recognized Texas in 1840.
The Mexican government, however, did not recognize Santa Arma's forced handover of Texas. For this reason, in 1837 the
Jfcaw*
republic organized the Texas Rangers to guard its long frontier from Mexican and Native American attacks. Finally, in 1844 Texas and Mexico signed an armistice. Mexico never recognized Texas' independence, however.
READING CHECK
Finding Main Ideas What issues did the new nation of Texas face?
SUMMARY AND PREVIEW
American set-I tiers in Texas challenged the Mexican government and won their independence. In the next section you will learn about the war between Mexico and the United States. Section 2 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What role did Stephen F. Austin play in the settlement of Texas?
b.	Make Inferences Why did Mexican officials want to bring more settlers to Texas?
c.	Evaluate Do you think Mexico's requirements for foreign immigrants were reasonable or unreasonable? Explain.
2.	a. Describe What were the important battles in the War for Texas Independence? Why was each important?
b.	Make Inferences Why did Texas offer land grants to settlers?
c.	Predict What problems might the Republic of Texas face?
Critical Thinking
3.	Sequencing Review your notes on American settlement in Texas. Then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to show the significant events in the history of the Republic ofTexas.
Significant Events
•liHU'K'l'JM
1.	Houston is founded and made the capital.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
^WriteSmart
4. Explaining the Texas Revolution Make a list of the most important players and events in the story of how Texas gained independence from Mexico. Consider also how you will present information about these people and events to your film's audience. What words, images, and sounds will make the story of the revolution come alive for the audience?
EXPANDING WEST 35’

butf
TEKS 1A, 6A, 6B, 6C, 6D, 6E, 7D, 10A,10B,10C,11A,11B,12A,12D, 22B,23C,23D

What You Will Learn...
1.	Many Americans believed that the nation had a manifest destiny to claim new lands in the West.
2.	As a result of the Mexican-American War, the United States added territory in the Southwest.
3.	American settlement in the Mexican Cession produced conflict and a blending of cultures.
L J
The Mexican-American War
If YOU were there...
Your family are Californios, Spanish settlers who have lived in California for many years. You raise horses on your ranch. So far, you have gotten along with American settlers. But it has become clear that the American government wants to take over California. You hear that fighting has already started.
How might life change under American rule?
The ideal of manifest destiny and the outcome of the Mexican-American War led to U.S. expansion to the Pacific Ocean.
BUILDING BACKGROUND
Mexican independence setthe stage for conflict and change in the West and Southwest. At the same time, Americans continued to move westward, settling in the Mexican territories of Texas, New Mexico, and California. American ambitions led to clashes with Mexico and the people who already lived in Mexico's territories. Key Terms and People
manifest destiny, p. 355
James K. Polk, p. 355
vaqueros, p. 357
Californios, p. 357
Bear Flag Revolt, p. 358
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, p. 361
Gadsden Purchase, p. 361
hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
Use the annotation tools in your eBook to take notes on manifest destiny and the Mexican-American War.
Manifest Destiny
We have it in our power to start the world over again.
—Thomas Paine, from his pamphlet Common Sense
Americans had always believed they could build a new, better society founded on democratic principles. In 1839 writer John O'Sullivan noted, "We are the nation of human progress, and who will, what can, set limits to our onward march?"
Actually, there was one limit: land. From the beginnings of the colonies, Americans had been moving west in search of land and economic opportunity. At the end of the Revolution, the Land Ordinance of 1785 and the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 established the method for dividing and governing new territories. By the 1840s the United States had a booming economy and population. Barely 70 years old, the nation needed even more room for farms, ranches, businesses, and ever-growing families. Americans looked West to what they saw as a vast wilderness, ready to be taken. The regions of Oregon, New Mexico, and Texas were being settled by Americans, and the national government worked to annex those lands to the United States.
354 CHAPTER 11
SgaB»Ky-K!®»?SB
Some people believed it was America's manifest destiny, or obvious fate, to settle land all the way to the Pacific Ocean in order to spread democracy. O'Sullivan coined the term in 1845. He wrote that it was America's "manifest destiny to overspread and to possess the whole continent which Providence [God] has given us for the development of the great experiment of liberty..."
In the 1840s and 1850s, manifest destiny was tied up with the slavery issue. If America expanded, would slavery be allowed in the new territories? Several presidents became involved in the difficult issue. Among them was President John Tyler. A pro-slavery Whig, Tyler wanted to increase the power of the southern slave states by annexing Texas. His fellow Whigs disagreed.
In 1844, the Whig Party passed up Tyler and chose Senator Henry Clay as its presidential candidate. At first opposing annexation, Clay changed his mind due to pressure from southern politicians. The Democratic Party chose former Tennessee governor James K. Polk to oppose Clay. Both candidates strongly favored acquiring Texas and Oregon.
Southerners feared the loss of Texas, a
possible new slave state. Others worried that
Texas might become an ally of Britain. These concerns helped Polk narrowly defeat Clay.
Acquiring New Territory
President Polk quickly set out to fulfill his promise to annex Oregon and Texas. Russia and Spain had given up their claims to Oregon Country. Britain and the United States had agreed to occupy the territory together.
As more Americans settled there, they began to ask that Oregon become part of the United States. Polk wanted to protect these settlers' interests. Some politicians noted that Oregon Country would provide a Pacific port for the growing U.S. trade with China.
Meanwhile, Britain and the United States disagreed over how to draw the United States-Canadian border. American expansionists cried, "Fifty-four forty or fight!" This slogan referred to 54°40' north latitude, the line to which Americans wanted their northern territory to extend.
Neither side really wanted a war, though. In 1846 Great Britain and the United States signed a treaty that gave the United States all Oregon land south of the forty-ninth parallel. This treaty drew the border that still exists today. Oregon became an organized U.S. territory in February 1848.
EXPANDING WEST 351
By March 1845, Congress had approved the annexation of Texas and needed only the support of the Republic of Texas. Americans continued to pour into Texas. Texas politicians hoped that joining the United States would help solve the republic's financial and military problems. The Texas Congress approved annexation in June 1845. Texas became part of the United States in December. This action angered the Mexican government, which considered Texas to be a "stolen province."
The Mexican Borderlands
Though it had lost Texas, Mexico still had settlements in other areas of the present-day Southwest to govern. New Mexico, with its capital at Santa Fe, was the oldest settled area and had the most people. Mexico also had settlements in present-day Arizona, Nevada, and California.
During early Spanish rule, the mission system had dominated much of the present-day American Southwest. Over time, it had become less important there, especially in
History Close-up
New Mexico, where settlers lived in small villages. In California, however, missions remained the focus of everyday life. Missions under later Spanish rule carried out huge farming and ranching operations using the labor of Native Americans. Some of the Indians came willingly to the missions. Others were brought by force. Usually, they were not allowed to leave the mission once they had arrived. They had to adopt the clothing, food, and religion of the Spaniards. As a result, some Native American groups moved and settled in different areas to avoid being controlled by the missions. One effect of these migrations was more conflicts over land.
Missions often sold their goods to local pueblos, or towns, that arose near the missions and presidios. One wealthy California settler, Mariano Guadalupe Vallejo, remembered the early days.
^We were the pioneers of the Pacific coast, building towns and missions while General [George] Washington was carrying on the war of the Revolution/'
—Mariano Guadalupe Vallejo, quoted in Eyewitnesses and Others
Ranch Life
Spanish and Mexican vaqueros, or cowboys, were expert horse riders. They used their horses to herd cattle on the ranches of the Spanish Southwest.
After winning independence from Spain in 1821, Mexico began to change old Spanish policies toward California and Texas. By the 1830s, Mexico ended the mission system in the region. In California, mission lands were broken up, and huge grants were given to some of the wealthiest settlers, including Vallejo. They created vast ranchos, or ranches, with tens of thousands of acres of land. Vaqueros, or cowboys, managed the large herds of cattle and sheep. Cowhides were so valuable that they were called "California banknotes." Hides were traded for household items and luxury goods with ship captains from the eastern United States. Some settlers also made wine and grew citrus fruits.
Although they had been freed from the missions, for most California Indians the elements of life changed very little. They continued to herd animals and do much of the hard physical labor on ranches and farms. Some, however, ran away into the wilderness or to the nearby towns of San Diego and Los Angeles.
The Californios
Because of the great distance between California and the center of Mexico's government, by the early 1820s California had only around 3,200 colonists. These early California settlers, called Californios, felt little connection to their faraway government.
Californios developed a lasting reputation for hospitality and skilled horse riding. In Two Years Before the Mast, American novelist Richard Henry Dana Jr. wrote about his encounters with Californio culture. He described, for example, what happened after a Californio served a feast to Dana and a friend.
^We took out some money and asked him how much we were to pay. He shook his head and crossed himself, saying that it was charity—that the Lord gave it to us."
—Richard Henry Dana Jr., from Two Years Before the Mast
In addition to traders and travelers, a
small number of settlers also arrived from
Mariano Guadalupe Vallejo
1808-1890
Mariano Guadalupe Vallejo was born to an influential Californio family in Monterey. He joined the Mexican army shortly after Mexico's independence from Spain. He was soon put in charge of Mexico's efforts to increase settlement in northern California. Vallejo eventually became the richest man in California, owning enormous amounts of land and livestock. He welcomed American rule of California, believing it would result in self-government for Californios. He eventually lost most of his wealth fighting Anglos who claimed his land. Vallejo served at the state constitutional convention as well as in the first state senate.
Analyzing Why did Vallejo encourage American rule of California?
the United States. They were called Anglos by the Californios. Although there were few Anglo settlers in California, their calls for independence increased tensions between Mexico and the United States.
reading Check
Drawing Inferences How
did manifest destiny affect Spanish and Mexican rule in California?
Academic Vocabulary element a basic part of an individual's surroundings
Mexican-American War
Diplomatic relations between Mexico and the United States became increasingly strained. U.S. involvement in California and Texas contributed to this tension.
Conflict Breaks Out
Mexico had long insisted that its northern border lay along the Nueces River and refused to accept the U.S. annexation of Texas. The United States said the border was farther south, along the Rio Grande. In June 1845 President Polk ordered General Zachary Taylor to lead an army into the disputed region.
EXPANDING WEST 35'
Polk sent diplomat John Slidell to Mexico City to try to settle the border dispute. Slidell came with an offer to buy New Mexico and California for $30 million. Mexican officials refused to speak to him.
In March 1846, General Taylor led his troops to the Rio Grande. He camped across from Mexican forces stationed near the town of Matamoros, Mexico. In April, the Mexican commander told Taylor to withdraw from Mexican territory. Taylor refused. The two sides clashed, and several U.S. soldiers were killed.
In response, Polk said to Congress:
^Mexico has passed the boundary of the United States, has invaded our territory, and shed American blood upon the American soil.. .The two nations are now at war/'
K.
Polk, from his address to Congress, May 11,1846 Polk's war message was persuasive. Two days later, Congress declared war on Mexico.
War Begins
At the beginning of the war with Mexico, the U.S. Army had better weapons and equipment. Yet it was greatly outnumbered and poorly prepared. The government put out a call for 50,000 volunteers. About 200,000 responded. Many were young men who thought the war would be a grand adventure in a foreign land.
On the home front, many Americans supported the war. However, many Whigs thought the war was unjustified and avoidable. Northern abolitionists also opposed the conflict. They feared the spread of slavery into southwestern lands.
While Americans debated the war, fighting proceeded. General Taylor's soldiers won battles south of the Nueces River. Taylor then crossed the Rio Grande and occupied Matamoros, Mexico. While Taylor waited for more men, Polk ordered General Stephen Kearny to attack New Mexico. On August 18, 1846, Kearny took Santa Fe, the capital city, without a fight. He claimed the entire province of New Mexico for the United States and marched west to California, where another conflict with Mexico was already under way.
The Bear Flag Revolt
In 1846, only about 500 Americans lived in the huge province of California, in contrast to about 12,000 Californios. Yet, in the spirit of manifest destiny, a small group of American settlers seized the town of Sonoma, north of San Francisco, on June 14. Hostilities began between the two sides when the Americans took some horses that were intended for the Mexican militia. In what became known as the Bear Flag Revolt, the Americans declared California to be an independent nation. Above the town, the rebels hoisted a hastily made flag of a grizzly bear facing a red star. Californios laughed at the roughly-made bear, thinking it "looked more like a pig than a bear."
John C. Fremont, a U.S. Army captain, was leading a mapping expedition across the Sierra Nevada when he heard of the possible war with Mexico. Fremont went to Sonoma and quickly joined the American settlers in their revolt against the Californios. Because war had already broken out between the United States and Mexico, Fremont's actions were seen as beneficial to the American cause in the region. His stated goal, however, was Californian independence, not to annex California to the United States. During the revolt, several important Californios were taken prisoner, including Mariano Vallejo. Governor Vallejo and his brother were held at an Anglo settlement for two months without any formal charges being brought against them. Long after his release, Vallejo wrote a history of California that included an account of his time as a bear flag prisoner.
But the bear flag was quick to fall. In July, U.S. naval forces came ashore in California and raised the stars and stripes. Kearny's army arrived from the East. The towns of San Diego, Los Angeles, and San Francisco fell rapidly. In August, U.S. Navy commodore Robert Stockton claimed California for the United States. Some Californios continued to resist until early 1847, when they surrendered.
358 CHAPTER 11
Mexican-American War, 1846-1847
The Bear Flag Revolt
American settlers took over Sonoma, the regional headquarters of the Mexican army. They captured Mexican general Mariano Vallejo and declared California a new country: the California Republic. The United States never recognized the new nation, however.

its
ous Christi
90*W
PACIFIC
OCEAN
* Resaca de la Palma, flatamoros May 1846 Gulf of
	American forces
A
American victory *0-	Mexican forces
&	Mexican victory
dv	Fort
—	Modern-day state
	boundaries
0	100	200 Miles
100 200 Kilometers
Mexico
rTropic of Cancer
110 W

-20’N---
^Veracruz, .r. 1847
End of the War
General Winfield Scott landed at Veracruz and defeated troops in the Mexican fortress there. He then marched inland, toward Mexico City. Scott's capture of the Mexican capital led to the end of the war.
GEOGRAPHY
SKILLS INTERPRETING MAPS

1.	Location What Mexican city did Scott's forces attack in March 1847?
2.	Movement Which U.S. commander led forces from Santa Fe to San Diego?
EXPANDINGJ/Vf
War's End
In Mexico General Taylor finally got the reinforcements he needed. He drove his forces deep into enemy lands. Santa Anna, thrown from office after losing Texas, returned to power in Mexico in September 1846. He quickly came after Taylor.
The two armies clashed at Buena Vista in February 1847. After a close battle with heavy casualties on both sides, the Mexican Army retreated. The next morning, the cry went up: "The enemy has fled! The field is ours!"
Taylor's success made him a war hero back home. The general's popularity troubled President Polk, and when Taylor's progress stalled, Polk gave the command to General Winfield Scott. A beloved leader, he was known by his troops as "Old Fuss and Feathers" because of his strict military discipline.
Scott sailed to the port of Veracruz, where the strongest fortress in Mexico was located. On March 29, after an 88-hour artillery attack,
Veracruz fell. Scott moved on to the final goal, Mexico City, the capital. Taking a route similar to one followed by Spanish conquistador Heman Cortes in 1519, the Americans pushed 200 or so miles inland. Santa Anna tried to stop the U.S. forces at Cerro Gordo in mid-April, but failed. By August 1847, U.S. troops were at the edge of Mexico City.
After a truce failed, Scott ordered a massive attack on Mexico City. Mexican soldiers and civilians fought fierce battles in and around the capital. At a military school atop the steep, fortified hill of Chapultepec, young Mexican cadets bravely defended their hopeless position. At least one soldier jumped to his death rather than surrender to the invading forces. Finally, on September 14, 1847, Mexico City fell. Santa Anna soon fled the country.
Sequencing In chronological
order, list the key battles of the Mexican-American War.
Reading Check .
360 CHAPTER 11
American Settlement in the Mexican Cession
The war ended after Scott took Mexico City. In February 1848, the United States and Mexico signed the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, which officially ended the war and forced Mexico to turn over much of its northern territory to the United States. Known as the Mexican Cession, this land included the present-day states of California, Nevada, and Utah. In addition, it included most of Arizona and New Mexico and parts of Colorado and Wyoming. The United States also won the area claimed by Texas north of the Rio Grande. The Mexican Cession totaled more than 500,000 square miles and increased the size of the United States by almost 25 percent.
Agreements and Payments
In exchange for this vast territory, the United
States agreed to pay Mexico $15 million. In
addition, the United States assumed claims of
more than $3 million held by American citizens against the Mexican government. The treaty also addressed the status of Mexicans in the Mexican Cession. The treaty provided that they would be "protected in the free enjoyment of their liberty and property, and secured in the free exercise of their religion." The Senate passed the treaty in March 1848.
After the war with Mexico, some Americans wanted to guarantee that any southern railroad to California would be built completely on American soil. James Gadsden, U.S. minister to Mexico, negotiated an important agreement with Mexico in December 1853. Under the terms of the Gadsden Purchase, the U.S. government paid Mexico $10 million. In exchange, the United States received the southern parts of what are now Arizona and New Mexico. With this purchase, the existing boundary with Mexico was finally fixed.
Surge of American Settlers
After the Mexican-American War, a flood of Americans moved to the Southwest. American newcomers struggled against longtime residents to control the land and other valuable resources, such as water and minerals. Most Mexicans, Mexican Americans, and Native Americans faced legal, economic, and social discrimination. As a result, they found it difficult to protect their rights.
The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo promised to protect Mexican American residents' property rights. Yet differences between Mexican and U.S. land laws led to great confusion. The U.S. government often made Mexican American landowners go to court to prove that they had titles to their land. Landowners had to pay their own travel costs as well as those of witnesses and interpreters. They also had to pay attorneys' and interpreters' fees. These legal battles often bankrupted land-owners. New settlers also tended to ignore Mexican legal concepts, such as community property or community water rights.
EXPANDING WEST 3l
T°
Today Linking
1.	Region In what region does the largest percentage of Mexican Americans live?
2.	Place Which two states have the highest concentrations of Mexican Americans?
THE IMPACT
TODAY
Mexican holidays like Cinco de Mayo and Dia de los Muertos are still popular holidays in the Southwest.
White settlers also battled with American Indians over property rights. In some areas, new white settlers outnumbered Native Americans. Anglo settlers often tried to take control of valuable water resources and grazing lands. In addition, settlers rarely respected Indian holy places. Native American peoples such as the Navajo and the Apache tried to protect their land and livestock from the settlers. Indians and settlers alike attacked one another to protect their interests.
Cultural Encounters
Despite conflicts, different cultures shaped one another in the Southwest. In settlements with large Mexican populations, laws were often printed in both English and Spanish. Names of places—such as San Antonio, San
Diego, and Santa Barbara—show Hispanic heritage. Other place-names, such as Taos and Tesuque, are derived from Native American words. Communities throughout the Southwest regularly celebrated both Mexican and American holidays.
Mexican and Native American knowledge and traditions also shaped many local economies. Mexican Americans taught Anglo settlers about mining in the mountains. Many ranching communities were first started by Mexican settlers. They also introduced new types of saddles and other equipment to American ranchers. Adobe, developed by the Anasazi Indians, was adopted from the Pueblo people by the Spanish. It is still commonly used by American residents in New Mexico, Arizona, and California.
362 CHAPTER 11
Trade also changed the Southwest. For example, the Navajo created handwo-ven woolen blankets to sell to Americans. Americans in turn brought manufactured goods and money to the Southwest. Due to exchanges like these, the economies of many Mexican American and Native American communities in the Southwest began to change.
Water Rights
Eastern water-use laws commonly required owners whose land bordered streams or rivers to maintain a free flow of water. These restrictions generally prevented landowners from constructing dams because doing so would infringe upon the water rights of neighbors downstream.
In the typically dry climate of the West, large-scale agriculture was not possible without irrigation. Dams and canals were
required to direct scarce water to fields. This need conflicted with the accepted eastern tradition of equal access to water.
Brigham Young established a strict code regulating water rights for the Mormon community. In any dispute over water use, the good of the community would outweigh the interests of individuals. Young's approach stood as an example for modem water laws throughout the West.
Summarizing What were
some of the early agreements between the United States and Mexico, and why were they significant?
America's west-d rapidly after the Mexican-American War. In the next section you will learn about the California gold rush.
Reading check ,
■ Summary and Preview
I ward expansion contini
Section 3 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Analyze What was manifest destiny and how did it influence westward expansion?
b.	Explain What plan did new territories and states follow to establish their political structures?
c.	Make Inferences Why was westward expansion such an important issue in the election of 1844?
d.	Evaluate Do you think California benefited from Mexican independence? Why or why not?
2.	a. Recall Why did the United States declare war on Mexico?
b.	Summarize What was General Winfield Scott's strategy for winning the war with Mexico?
c.	Elaborate Would you have sided with those who opposed the war with Mexico or with those who supported it? Why?
3.	a. Define What was the Mexican Cession? Where was it located?
b.	Describe What conflicts did American settlers, Native Americans, and Mexican Americans in the Mexican Cession experience? How were these resolved?
c.	Draw Conclusions What were the cultural differences between the eastern United States and the American Southwest? What were the economic differences?
d.	Evaluate In your opinion, what was the most important effect of the Mexican-American War and the annexation of the Mexican Cession?
Critical Thinking
4. Identifying Cause and Effect Review your notes on manifest destiny and U.S. territorial expansion. Then use the graphic organizer below to show how Americans'expansion into California caused war, as well as the effects of the war.
5. Explaining the Mexican-American War How
will you convey ideas, such as manifest destiny, in a film? How will you explain to your audience the Mexican-American War's role in expansion of the United States? Consider these questions and make a note of your answers.
EXPANDING WEST 3<

SECTION
»»»«■»

4

TEKS 1A, 6E, 10A, 10B, 10C, 11A, 12D, 23A, 23D
The California Gold Rush
What You Will Learn...
1.	The discovery of gold brought settlers to California.
2.	The gold rush had a lasting impact on California's population and economy.
T
The California gold rush changed the future of the West.
Key Terms and People
John Sutter, p. 365 Donner party, p. 365 forty-niners, p. 365 prospect, p. 366 placer miners, p. 366
If YOU were there...
You are a low-paid bank clerk in New England in early 1849. Local newspaper headlines are shouting exciting news:"Gold Is Discovered in California! Thousands Are on Their Way West."You enjoy having a steady job. However, some of your friends are planning to go west, and you are being influenced by their excitement. Your friends are even buying pickaxes and other mining equipment. They urge you to go west with them.
Would you go west to seek your fortune in California? Why?
hmhsocialstudies.com
BUILDING BACKGROUND
At the end of the Mexican-American War, the United States gained control of Mexican territories in the West, including all of the present-day state of California. American settlements in California increased slowly at first. Then, the discovery of gold brought quick population growth and an economic boom. flAKINCI^b
Use the annotation tools in your eBook to take notes on the California gold rush.
Discovery of Gold Brings Settlers
In the 1830s and 1840s, Americans who wanted to move to California started up the Oregon Trail. At the Snake River in present-day Idaho, the trail split. People bound for California took the southern route, which became known as the California Trail. This path ran through the Sierra Nevada mountain range. American emigrants and traders on the California Trail tried to cross these mountains before the season's first snows.
Although many Americans traveled along the California Trail, few actually settled in California. American merchants were usually more interested in trading goods made in factories than in establishing settlements. They traded for gold and silver coins, hides, and tallow (animal fat used to make soap and candles) from Mexico. California became a meeting ground for traders from Mexico and the United States.
Before the Mexican-American War, California's population consisted mostly of Mexicans and Native Americans. When Mexico
364 CHAPTER 11
controlled California, Mexican officials did not want many Americans to settle there. However, in 1839 they did give Swiss immigrant John Sutter permission to start a colony. Sutter's Fort, located near the Sacramento River, soon became a popular rest stop for many American emigrants. These new arrivals praised Sutter's hospitality and helpfulness. By the mid-1840s some Anglo Californians were publishing newspaper advertisements and guidebooks encouraging other settlers to move West.
The Donner party was a group of western travelers who went to California but were stranded in the Sierra Nevada Mountains during winter. The party began its journey West in the spring of 1846. Trying to find a shortcut, the group left the main trail and got lost. When the Donner party reached the Sierra Nevada Mountains, they became trapped by heavy snows. They were stuck and had almost no food.
A rescue party found the starving and freezing group in February 1847. Of the original 87 travelers, 42 had died.
Gold in California
In January 1848, Sutter sent a carpenter named James Marshall to build a sawmill beside a nearby river. While working near Sutter's Mill, Marshall glanced at the ground. "I reached my hand down and picked it up; it made my heart thump, for I was certain it was gold."
Sutter and Marshall agreed to keep the discovery a secret. However, when they examined the work site the next day, they met a Spanish-speaking Native American worker holding a nugget and shouting, "Oro |gokl|! Oro! Oro!"
Sutter's workers soon quit to search for gold. Stories of the discovery rapidly spread across the country. President Polk added to the national excitement by confirming the California gold strike in his farewell message to Congress in December 1848. In 1849 about 80,000 gold-seekers came to California, hoping to strike it rich. These gold-seeking migrants to California were called forty-niners. As one Iowa woman who
"Gold Fever"
"Gold fever" brought80,000people, Hke this miner, to California in 1849alone. One California newspaper captured the excitement; "The whole country, from San Francisco to Los Angeles, and from the sea shore to the base of the Sierra Neva-das, resounds with the ary of 'gold, GOLD, GOLDF while the field is left half planted, the house half built; and everything neglected but the manufacture of shovels and pickaxes/'Belowisapiece of jewelry made from nuggets found in California.
Why was everything neglected except for "the manufacture of shovels and pickaxes"?

>. A
HISTORY
California State Library
VIDEO
Gold Rush Miners Suffer
Hardships
’TF hmhsocialstudies.coml
left to find gold recalled, "At that time the 'gold fever' was contagious, and few, old or young, escaped the malady [sickness]." Nearly 80 percent of the forty-niners were Americans, while the rest came from all over the world.
Most forty-niners braved long and often dangerous journeys to reach California. Many easterners and Europeans arrived via sea routes. Midwestern gold-seekers usually traveled West in wagon trains. Most forty-niners first arrived in San Francisco. This port town became a convenient trade center and stopping point for travelers. As a result, its population increased from around 800 in March 1848 to more than 25,000 by 1850.
Staking a Claim
Few of the forty-niners had any previous gold-mining experience. The work was difficult and time-consuming. The forty-niners would prospect, or search for gold, along the banks of streams or in shallow surface mines.
The early forty-niners worked an area that ran for 70 miles along rivers in northern California.
The first person to arrive at a site would "stake a claim." Early miners frequently banded together to prospect for gold. The miners agreed that each would keep a share of whatever gold was discovered. When one group abandoned a claim, more recent arrivals often took it over, hoping for success. Sometimes, two or more groups arrived in an area at the same time. In the early gold-rush days, before courts were established, this competition often led to conflict. Occasionally, violent disputes arose over competing claims.
Mining methods varied according to the location. The most popular method, placer (pLA-suhr) mining, was done along rivers and streams. Placer miners used pans or other devices to wash gold nuggets out of loose rock and gravel. To reach gold deposits buried in
366 CHAPTER 11
Why might people leave their homes and travel long distances in search of gold?
the hills, miners had to dig shafts and tunnels. These tasks were usually pursued by mining companies, rather than by individuals.
In 1853 California's yearly gold production peaked at more than $60 million. Individual success stories inspired many miners. One lucky man found two and a half pounds of gold after only 15 minutes of work. Two African American miners found a rich gold deposit that became known as Negro Hill in honor of their discovery. The vast majority of miners, however, did not become rich. Forty-niner Alonzo Delano commented that the "lean, meager [thin], worn-out and woebegone [sorrowful] miner.. .might daily be seen at almost every point in the upper mines."
Life in the Mining Camps
Mining camps sprang up wherever enough
people gathered to look for gold. These
camps had colorful names, such as Hang-
town or Poker Flat.
Miners in the camps came from many cultures and backgrounds. Most miners were young, unmarried men in search of adventure. Only around 5 percent of gold-rush immigrants were women or children. The hardworking women generally made good money by cooking meals, washing clothes, and operating boardinghouses. One such woman, Catherine Haun, recalled her first home in California.
** We were glad to settle down and go housekeeping in a shed that was built in a day of lumber purchased with the first fee... For neighbors, we had a real live saloon. I never have received more respectful attention than I did from these neighbors/'
—Catherine Haun, quoted in Ordinary Americans, edited by Linda R. Monk
Haun's husband was a lawyer. He concluded that he could make more money practicing law than he could panning for gold. He was one of many people who made a good living supplying miners with food, clothing, equipment, and other services. Miners paid high prices for basic necessities because the large amounts of gold in circulation caused severe inflation in California. A loaf of bread, for example, might cost 5 cents in the East, but it would sell for 50 to 75 cents in San Francisco. Eggs sometimes sold for $1 apiece.
Some settlers took full advantage of these conditions for free enterprise. Biddy Mason and her family, for instance, had arrived in California as slaves. A Georgia slaveholder had brought them during the gold-rush years. Mason quickly discovered that most Californians opposed slavery, particularly in the gold mines. She and her family gained their freedom and moved to the small village of Los Angeles. There she saved money until she could purchase some land. Over time, Mason's property increased in value from $250 to $200,000. She became one of the wealthiest landowners in California, a community leader, and a well-known supporter of charities.
EXPANDING WEST 367
Westward Movement in the United States

Causes
•	Americans believe in the idea of manifest destiny.
•	The United States acquires vast new lands in the West.
•	Pathfinders open trails to new territories.
•	Gold is discovered in California.


Effects
•	Native Americans are forced off lands.
•	Americans travel west to settle new areas.
•	The United States stretches to the Pacific Ocean.
•	California experiences a population boom.
THE IMPACT
TODAY
Today California is the nation's most populous state.
Immigrants to California
The lure of gold in California attracted miners from around the world. Many were from countries that had seen few immigrants to the United States in the past. They were drawn to California by the lure of wealth. For example, famine and economic hardship in southeastern China caused many Chinese men to leave China for America. Most hoped to find great wealth, and then return home to China. These immigrants were known in Chinese as gam saan haak, or "travelers to Gold Mountain." Between 1849 and 1853 about 24,000 Chinese men moved to California. "From far and near we came and were pleased," wrote merchant Lai Chun-chuen in 1855.
Chinese immigrants soon discovered that many Americans did not welcome them, however. In 1852, California placed a high monthly tax on all foreign miners. Chinese miners had no choice but to pay this tax if they wanted to prospect for gold in California. Some Chinese workers were the targets of violent attacks. If the Chinese
miners dared to protest the attacks, the legal system favored Americans over immigrants.
Despite such treatment, many Chinese immigrants still worked in the gold mines. Some looked for other jobs. Others opened their own businesses. A newspaper reported Chinese working as "ploughmen, laundry-men, placer miners, woolen spinners and weavers, domestic servants, cigar makers, [and] shoemakers."
In 1849 alone, about 20,000 immigrants arrived in California not only from China but also from Europe, Mexico, and South America. Like most Americans who sought gold, these new arrivals intended to return home after they had made their fortunes. However, many decided to stay. Some began businesses. For example, Levi Strauss, a German Jewish immigrant, earned a fortune by making tough denim pants for miners.
Categorizing What types of
people came to California hoping to benefit from the gold rush?
Reading Check .
Impact on California
During the Spanish and Mexican periods of settlement, California's population grew slowly. The arrival of the forty-niners changed .this dramatically.
Population Boom
California's population explosion made it eligible for statehood only two years after being acquired by the United States. In 1850 California became the 31st state.
However, fast population growth had negative consequences for many Californios and California Native Americans. One early observer of the gold rush described why.
^The Yankee regarded every man but [his own kind] as an interloper [trespasser], who had no right to come to California and pick up the gold of'free and enlightened citizens.'"
—W. Kelly, quoted in The Other Californians, by Robert F. Heizer and Alan F. Almquist
368 CHAPTER 11

l»^
IBM
San Francisco Grows
San Francisco boomed in the early years of the gold rush.


What factors led to San Francisco's > population growth?	*
t "

■ M
A£S|r** s" _
San Francisco Population, 1847-1850
25
47?
ITS IZ>
=5
o
- 15
•2 10 a "3
P 5
. 41?
Economic Growth
In addition to rapid population growth, a flood of new businesses and industries transformed California's economy. Gold mining remained an important part of the state's early economy. But Californians soon discovered other ways to make a living. Farming and ranching, for example, became industries for those willing to do the necessary hard labor. The rich soil of California still supports one of the largest agricultural economies in the United States.
California faced an obstacle to growth, though. The state was isolated from the rest of the country. It was difficult to bring in and ship out goods. The answer to the isolation problem was to bring the railroad all the way to California. Californians would have to wait almost 20 years for that. Completion of the transcontinental railroad in 1869 at last gave Californians the means to grow a stronger economy.
Reading Check .
Analyzing Information
What political effect resulted from California's rapid population growth?
AND PREVIEW
Americans to create new lives and seize new opportunities. In the next chapter
you will learn about the Industrial Revolu-
tion in America.
■ Summary
I moved we
Section 4 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Recall Where was Sutter's Mill? Why was it important?
b.	Summarize What types of people participated in the California gold rush, and how did they take part in it?
c.	Elaborate What are some possible problems caused by the arrival of so many new settlers to California?
2.	a. Describe How did some people hope to solve the problem of California's isolation from the rest of
the country?
b.	Draw Inferences What effect did California's rapid population growth have on Californios and Native Americans?
c.	Evaluate Overall, do you think that the gold rush had a positive or negative effect on California? Explain.
Critical Thinking
3. Evaluating Review your notes on the gold rush. Then copy the graphic organizer below. Use it to show how the discovery of gold changed California.
4. Describing the California Gold Rush Review this section and list the significant events and effects of the gold rush. Consider also how your film can convey the excitement of that time in American history.
EXPANDING WEST 361
History and Geography
America's

tflSfclBSI

-vC<A. n a




Water Rights Water was critical in the dry West. Bitter disputes arose over who had the water rights to streams. Gold rush miners developed a simple system: whoever used the water first owned the rights to it. In other parts of the West, the community as a whole had a right to use the water source.
In the 1830s, a new
dream began to shape
the American mind—manifest destiny. Manifest destiny was the belief that the United States should extend all the way to the Pacific Ocean. By 1850, that dream had become a reality. In 1845, the United States annexed Texas. In 1848, it acquired Oregon and the huge Mexican Cession. By 1853, with the Gadsden Purchase, the United States had taken the basic shape it still has today.

<,;S? -
5 ■
Manifest Destiny Supporters of manifest destiny believed it was God's will that the United States should expancj ancj Spreac| democracy across North America. Huge numbers of settlers headed west to tame new lands.
organized


America's Population, 1850:23.6 million
Wtritory
2°/<Mr<1%
Ethnic Groups, 1850
■	White/European
■	African American
■	Native American 0 Asian
■	Mexican American
Indian
i%?r°
Gold Fever
The discovery of
gold in California in 1848 set off a massive migration. In 1849 some 80,000 forty-niners headed toward California. San Francisco, located on an excellent natural port, grew quickly as a result.
X
^Territory
The Rocky Mountains The Rocky Mountains were a gigantic obstacle to settlers on their way west. Pathfinders like Lt. John C. Fremont traveled widely in the region, making maps and noting possible trails. The South Pass, through which the Oregon Trail ran, was one of the few easy ways through the great chain of mountains.
Religions, 1850
■	Protestant
■	Catholic
■	Jewish
■	Other
■ C v w.•'*'	• -
.v./.W'V v

|	! Texas annexation, 1845
p ' | Claim recognized in Oregon Treaty, 1848 Mexican Cession, 1848 Gadsden Purchase, 1853
...h
x \vA ' *
150
300 Miles
150	300 Kilometers
j Claimed by Texas

le ,'A^t

IV
J
1.	Movement Why did San Francisco grow so rapidly?
2.	Human-Environment Interaction Why was water so important in the West?
70° W
sic of Cancer

Social Studies Skills
Analysis Critical Thinking	civic
Particioation
Study
Interpreting and Creating Maps
Define the Skill
Maps show features on Earth's surface. These can be physical features, such as mountains and rivers, or human features, such as roads and settlements. Historical maps show an area as it was in the past. Interpreting and creating maps can answer questions about history as well as geography.
Learn the Skill
Follow these steps to gain information from a map.
1.	Read the title to determine what the map is about and the time period it covers.
2.	Study the legend or key to understand what the colors or symbols on the map mean. Note the map scale, which is used to measure distances. Note the map's other features. Maps often contain labels and other information in addition to what is explained in the legend or key.
3.	To create a map, research the information you want to include. Then draw the features to represent this information, including borders, labels, symbols, a key, and a title.
Practice the Skill
Interpret the map below to answer the first two questions below. The create the map described in Question 3.
1.	The addition of which territory almost doubled the size of the United States?
2.	What was the smallest expansion of U.S. borders, and when did it take place?
3.	Research the important battles of the Texas Revolution, then make a map that includes their locations, troop movements, and the winner of each battle. What questions can the map answer?
Growth of the United States to 1853
■ United States, 1783 BUI Louisiana Purchase, 1803 H Red River Basin, 1818 | I Spanish Cession, 1819 Texas Annexation, 1845
BM
Oregon Country, 1846 HH Mexican Cession, 1848 I ~l Gadsden Purchase, 1853 s Disputed Territory 0	300_______600 Miles
600 Kilometers

372 CHAPTER 11
Chapter Review
Visual Summary
Use the visual summary below to help you review the main ideas of the chapter.
U.S.
Expansion 1845	United States annexes Texas.
1846
Mexican War begins
1848	United States wins the Mexican War and gains the Mexican Cession. Oregon becomes a U.S. territory.
1849	California gold rush begins.
1853 Gadsden Purchase establishes the southwestern U.S. border.
1839	Sutter's -Fort established.
1840	Pioneers begin traveling West on the Oregon Trail.
Reviewing Vocabulary,
Terms, and People
Identify the correct term or person from the chapter that best fits each of the following descriptions.
1.	Mexican priest who led a rebellion for independence from Spain
2.	Spanish cowboys in California
3.	A group of pioneers who were stranded in the Sierra Nevada Mountains and struggled to survive the winter
4.	Agents hired by the Mexican government to attract settlers to Texas
5.	The belief that the United States was meant to expand across the continent to the Pacific Ocean
6.	Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
7.	Fur traders and trappers who lived west of the Rocky Mountains and in the Pacific Northwest
8.	Mexican ruler who fought to keep Texas from gaining independence
9.	Swiss immigrant who received permission from Mexico to start a colony in California
10.	Western trail from Missouri to New Mexico that was an important route for trade between American and Mexican merchants
Comprehension and
Critical Thinking
SECTION 1 (Pages 346-349)
11.	a. Identify What different groups of people traveled West? What economic benefits did they hope for?
b.	Draw Conclusions Why did Brigham Young move the Mormon community to Utah?
c.	Predict What are some possible problems that might result from American settlement in the West?
SECTION 2 (Pages 350-353)
12.	a. Identify Who were Stephen F. Austin and Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna?
EXPANDING WEST 373
b.	Draw Conclusions Why did settlers in Texas rebel against Mexican rule?
c.	Elaborate In what ways was the Texas struggle for independence similar to that of the United States?
SECTION 3 (Pages 354-363)
13.	a. Describe How did the scarcity of water in the West affect the location of settlements and their economic activities? What were the benefits and problems created by dams and irrigation?
b.	Draw Conclusions What economic and cultural influences did Native Americans and Mexican Americans have on American settlers in the Mexican Cession?
c.	Explain What were the key political, economic, and social roots of manifest destiny?
d.	Predict What are some possible problems the acquisition of so much territory might cause the United States?
SECTION 4 (Pages 364-369)
14.	a. Identify Which immigrant groups came to California during the gold rush? What roles did women and immigrants play in the California gold rush?
b.	Make Inferences Why were most gold-rush settlers young, unmarried men?
c.	Predict What long-term effects might the gold rush have on California's future?
Reviewing Themes
15.	Economics What role did economics play in the desire of Americans to go west?
16.	Geography When was the era of westward expansion?
17.	Geography What were the main trails to the West, and what areas did they pass through? How were these areas similar and how were they different?
Reading Skills
Comparing Historical Texts Use the Reading Skills taught in this chapter to answer the question below.
18.	Choose one topic from the chapter to research. Find three primary sources and three second-
ary sources on the topic. Compare the types of sources and the information in each source in a short description of your research.
Social Studies Skills
Interpreting and Creating Maps: Expansion Use the
Social Studies Skills taught in this chapter to answer the questions about the map below.
19.	Place the expansions in the order in which they were acquired by the United States, according to the map.
20.	Create your own map of the westward expansion of the United States beginning with the 13 colonies.
21.	Write three questions about the movement of the U.S. population that might be answered by one of the two maps.
"’>'WriteSmart
22.	Writing an Outline for a Documentary Film
Look back through all your notes, and choose one topic from this chapter that you think would make a good 10-minute documentary. Your outline should be organized by scene (no more than 3 scenes), in chronological order.
For each scene, give the following information: main idea of scene, costumes and images to be used, audio to be used, and length of scene. As you plan, remember that the audience will be students your own age.
374 CHAPTER 11
CHAPTER
Texas Test Practice
DIRECTIONS:
Read each question and write the letter of the best response. 1 Use the map below to answer the following question.
The part of the present-day United States that was once claimed by Britain, Spain, and Russia is shown on the map by which letter? A W
B X C Y D Z
2	In general, what position did Californios take toward the Mexican-American War?
F
They supported the war because they wanted independence from Mexico. G
They supported the war because they wanted to become U.S. citizens. H
They opposed the war because they feared it might bring an end to slavery. J
They opposed the war because they did not want to lose control of California. 3	What was the main reason John Jacob Astor founded Astoria at the mouth of the Columbia River in 1811?
A
Plenty of freshwater and salt-water fish were available for residents to eat.
B
The soil there was rich and good for farming. C
Trappers could use the river to bring furs from the mountains to trade. D
The location offered easy protection from attacks by Native Americans or the French. 4	The main attraction of Texas for many Americans in the 1820s and 1830s was the
F freedom to practice the Catholic faith.
G availability of cheap or free land.
H desire to become citizens of Mexico.
J
Mexican rebellion against Spain. 5	Which of the following occurred after the Mexican-American War?
A
Mexican foods and festivals became more important to American culture. B
Prosperity of Mexican landowners in the Southwest increased under U.S. rule. C
Mexican Americans left the United States. D
The size of the United States was reduced. 6	Examine the following flier about cheap land available in the Dakota Territory and then use it to answer the question below.
Document-Based Question Who might have been attracted by this description of Dakota? Why?
EXPANDING WEST 37'
MULTIMEDIA CONNECTIONS

CLICK THROUGH
HISTORY

4i in « Mutual Protection
Trading & Mining Co.
INTER ACTIVITIES
hmhsocialstudies.com


■j

4
a.

MCI MULTIMEDIA CONNECTIONS
£
■8
■>
vftt
B
'iOh
4k

' <5».
“If any man has his health & will work, he can make more than ten times as much here as he can in the states in the same length of time. But many, veiy/ many, that come here meet with bad success & thousands will leave their bones here."
S.
Shufelt A
Miner s Letter Home Read the document to learn about one miner's opinion on the possibility of becoming rich in California.

•

Heading West
Watch the video to learn about the dangers that overland travelers faced when trying to get to California from the eastern United States.



; / fj I
Search for the Mother Lode
Watch the video to see the various methods that forty-niners used to mine the gold in California.
2
X’SiSIL. ...	' jjStai,,.
When gold was discovered in northern California in 1848, it caused a sensation. Gold seekers from the United States and the rest of the world rushed to California to find their fortunes. The conditions of the trip were difficult, as was the labor required to extract the gold from rivers and mines. Although some people became wealthy, many more never
found the riches they had expected. So many people arrived so quickly that California became a state within three years of gold being discovered.
Explore some of the history and documents of the California Gold Rush online. You can find a wealth of information, video clips, primary sources, activities, and more at |
71 hmhsocialstudies.com




Hi
Statehood
Watch the video to discover the political issues surrounding the admission of California as a free state and its implications for the rest of the nation.
THE REALWEST: RUSH FOR GOLD 375 M'
Assignment
Write a paper explaining the causes or the effects of the War of 1812.
Cause and Effect in History
Historians try to make sense of an event by considering why the event happened and what resulted from it. Exploring causes and effects can provide a deeper understanding of historical events and how they are connected
• to one another.
■QuB Using a Graphic Organizer
Use a graphic organizer like this to organize your research.
Cause 1
Cause 2 1
Event or Situation I
Effect
Effect
A
Writer's Framework 1.	Prewrite
Identifying Causes and Effects
A cause is an action or a situation that makes something else happen. What happens is called an effect. For example, if you stay up too late watching TV (cause), you might find yourself nodding off in class (effect). Often an event or situation will have several causes as well as several effects. In those cases, we may look at the order in which the causes or effects occurred, or we may look at their relative importance. Researching and Organizing
For this paper, you will write about the causes or the effects of the War of 1812. Gather information from the chapter in this textbook, an encyclopedia, or another source recommended by your teacher.
■	Look for two or three reasons (causes) why the War of 1812 (the event or situation) occurred.
■	At the same time, consider the war as a cause. Look for two or three effects of the war.
Then choose whether to write about the causes or the effects.
2.	Write
You can use this framework to help you write your first draft.
Introduction	Body	Conclusion
■ Begin with a quote or interesting fact	■ Present the causes or effects in	■ Summarize your ideas about the
about the event.	chronological (time) order or order	causes or the effects of the event
■ Identify the event you will discuss.	of importance.	[the war].
[The War of 1812]	■ Explain each cause or effect in its	
■ Identify whether you will be	own paragraph, providing support	
discussing the causes or the effects.	with facts and examples.	
376 UNIT 3
3. Evaluate and Revise
Evaluating
Drawing clear, logical connections is the key to writing about causes and effects. Use these questions to evaluate and revise your paper.
Evaluation Questions for an Explanation of Causes or Effects
Does the introduction begin with an interesting quotation or fact?
Does the introduction identify the event [the war] and the causes or events to be discussed?
Is each cause or effect explained in its own paragraph?
Do facts and examples help to explain each cause or effect and connect it to the event [the war]?
■	Are you using correct grammar, spelling, sentence structure, punctuation, and appropriate citation of your sources?
■	Are the causes or effects organized clearly—by chronological order or order of importance?
■	Does the conclusion summarize the causes or effects and their importance?
Recognizing False Cause-and-Effect In planning your essay, be careful to avoid false cause-and-effect relationships. The fact that one thing happened before or after another doesn't mean one caused the other. For example, the fact that James Madison was elected in 1808, just four years before the War of 1812, does not mean his election caused the War of 1812.
Revising
Make sure the connections between the war and its causes or effects are clear by sharing your paper with a classmate. If your classmate is confused, add background information. If he or she disagrees with your conclusions, add evidence or rethink your reasoning.
Using Transitions Here are some transitional words and phrases that show cause or effect relationships: because, as a result, therefore, for, since, so, consequently, for this reason.
4. Proofread and Publish
Proofreading
Some transitional words and phrases need to be set off from the sentence with commas. Here are two examples:
■	The Louisiana Territory was a huge region of land. As a result, the size of the United States almost doubled when the land was purchased.
■	Jefferson wanted to know more about the land he had purchased. Therefore, he asked Congress to fund an expedition.
Check your paper to see if you need to add commas after or around any transitional words or phrases.
Publishing
Get together with a classmate and share causes and/or effects. Compare your lists to see whether you have identified different causes or effects. Share your findings with your class.
m^WriteSmart
Use myWriteSmartto create, share, and revise your paper.
9 5. Practice and Apply
Use the steps and strategies outlined in this workshop to write your explanation of the causes or effects of the War of 1812.
THE NEW REPUBLIC 3

(Wswiiwinaso^
The United States continued to grow in size and wealth, experiencing revolutions in technology and business as did other parts of the world. During the earliest phases of expansion, regions of the United States developed differently from each other. Citizens differed in their ideas of progress, government, and religion. For the success of the nation, they tried to compromise on their disagreements. In the next four chapters, you will learn about two regions in the United States, and how they were alike and different.
Explore the Art
This painting shows a bustling street scene in New York City around 1797. What does the scene indicate about business in the city during this period?
CHAPTER
:fni
[Si
Essential Question
What changes occurred in the North during the early 1800s?
nwhiotebook
Women workers in a textile mill
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS)
1A, 5B, 5D, 7A, 11A, 11B, 12C, 12D, 13A, 13B, 14A, 14B, 18B, 18C, 23E, 24B, 27A, 27B, 27C, 27D, 28A, 28B, 29B, 29F
SECTION 1: The Industrial Revolution in America...............384
The Big Idea The Industrial Revolution transformed the way goods were produced in the United States.
SECTION 2: Changes in Working Life............................390
The Big Idea The introduction of factories changed working life for many Americans.
SECTION 3: The Transportation Revolution......................396
The Big Idea New forms of transportation improved business, travel, and communication in the United States.
SECTION 4: More Technological Advances........................402
The Big Idea Advances in technology led to new inventions that
continued to change daily life and work.
n

The Industrial
HISTORY
Revolution 71 hmhsocialstudies.com
VIDEO
js on Writing

^WriteSmart
Newspaper Advertisement The Industrial Revolution was a time when a great many new inventions were introduced. You work for an advertising agency, and your job is to design an advertisement for one of the inventions mentioned in this chapter. As you read, take notes on the inventions, their inventors, and how they changed life in the United States. Then choose one invention and design a newspaper advertisement to persuade readers to buy or use the invention.
United
States
1807
Robert Fulton's Clermont becomes the first commercially successful steamboat.
World
1790
The first steam-powered mill opens in Great Britain.
