380 CHAPTER 12
/IL
blew, machinery like this textile mill helped fuel the Industrial Revolution.
1830	1840	1845	1856
The Tom Thumb	Federal	Sarah Bagley is	Gail Borden
becomes the first	government	appointed secretary	patents a method of
locomotive in the	employees	of the New England	condensing milk so
United States to	receive a 10-	Working Men's	that it can be safely
carry passengers.	hour workday.	Association.	stored in cans.
tVAPOF
B
Ml 1838
The Sirius becomes the first ship to cross the Atlantic Ocean entirely under steam power.
1846
German astronomer Johann Galle observes that
Neptune is a planet.
1851
London's Great Exhibition displays inventions from around the world in the Crystal Palace.

Reading Social Studies
.	Geography	Politics
Economics
Society
and Culture Science and
FOCUS on Themes As you read this chapter, you will learn about how developments in science and technology brought about what is called the Industrial Revolution. As a result of the Industrial Revolution, you will see how American economic
patterns changed. Next, you will read about how family life changed as more and more people went to work in factories. Finally, you will see how new methods of transportation changed where people lived and how new inventions affected daily life and work.
Causes and Effects in History
FOCUS on Reading Have you heard the saying, "We have to understand the past to avoid repeating it."? That is one reason we look for causes and effects in history.
Cause and Effect Chains You might say that all of history is one long chain of causes and effects. It may help you to understand the course of history better if you draw out such a chain as you read. Recognizing causes and effects in a passage is sometimes easier if the author uses that signal the reader to look for a
Since the 1790s, wars between European powers had interfered with U.S. trade. American customers were no longer able to get all the manufactured
goods they were used to buying from British and European manufacturers . . . Americans began to buy the items they
needed from American manufacturers
instead of from foreign suppliers. As profits for American factories grew, manufacturers began to spend more money expanding their factories...
At the same time, many Americans began to realize that the United States
had been relying too heavily on foreign
goods, (p. 389)
cause or effect. These words include because, therefore, as a result, and thus. Sentences that include two separate events linked by one of these words show a cause and effect relationship between the events.
382 CHAPTER 12
From	i
Chapter 12,	|
p.396	|
I
I
. i
i
i
You Try It!
The following passage is from the chapter you are about to read. As you read each paragraph, ask yourself what is the cause and what is the effect of what is being discussed.
Transportation Revolution
These improvements were made possible largely by the invention of two new forms of transportation: the steamboat and steam-powered trains. They enabled goods, people, and information to travel rapidly and efficiently across the United States. Suddenly people across the nation could buy manufactured items and even food products unavailable to them before. This boosted industry and agriculture, which created a need for more labor.	j
After you have read the passage, answer the following questions in a class discussion on the topic. Use the connecting words and cause-and-effect sentence structures described on the previous page to explain causes and effects.
1.	What cause is being discussed in the first sentence? What were its effects?
2.	Draw a cause and effect chain that shows the events described in this paragraph.
3.	What main effect is discussed in the paragraph? How many causes are given for it?
Chapter 12
Section 1
Industrial Revolution (p. 385) textiles (p. 385)
Richard Arkwright (p. 385)
Samuel Slater (p. 386) technology (p. 387)
Eli Whitney (p. 387) interchangeable parts (p. 387) mass production (p. 387)
Section 2
Rhode Island system (p. 391)
Francis Cabot Lowell (p. 392)
Lowell system (p. 392) trade unions (p. 394) strikes (p. 394)
Sarah G. Bagley (p. 395)
Section 3
Transportation Revolution (p. 396) Robert Fulton (p. 397)
Clermont (p. 397)
Gibbons v. Ogden (p. 397)
Peter Cooper (p. 398)
Section 4
Samuel F. B. Morse (p. 402) telegraph (p. 402)
Morse code (p. 403)
John Deere (p. 404)
Cyrus McCormick (p. 404)
Isaac Singer (p. 405)
Academic Vocabulary
Success in school is related to knowing academic vocabulary— the words that are frequently used in school assignments and discussions. In this chapter, you will learn the following academic words:
efficient (p. 385) concrete (p. 395)
As you read Chapter 12, look for words that signal causes or effects. Picture these causes and effects as the links in a cause and effect chain.
THE NORTH 38
SECTION
1
fJb
TEKS 5B, 5D, 7A, 11A, 12C, 12D, 13A, 13B, 14A, 14B, 27A, 270,28B
What You Will Learn...
The Industrial Revolution in America
1.	The invention of new machines in Great Britain led to the beginning of the Industrial Revolution.
2.	The development of new machines and processes brought the Industrial Revolution to the United States.
3.	Despite a slow start in manufacturing, the United States made rapid improvements during the War of 1812.
T
The Industrial Revolution transformed the way goods were produced in the United States.
Key Terms and People
Industrial Revolution, p. 385 textiles, p. 385 Richard Arkwright, p. 385 Samuel Slater, p. 386 technology, p. 387 Eli Whitney, p. 387 interchangeable parts, p. 387 mass production, p. 387
hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING
NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to list the key contributors to the Industrial Revolution and their inventions.
If YOU were there...
You live in a small Pennsylvania town in the 1780s. Your father is a blacksmith, but you earn money for the family, too. You raise sheep and spin their wool into yarn. Your sisters knit the yarn into warm wool gloves and mittens. You sell your products to merchants in the city. But now you hear that someone has invented machines that can spin thread and make cloth.
Would you still be able to earn the same amount of money for your family? Why?
I BUILDING BACKGROUND
In the early 1700s making goods depend-I ed on the hard work of humans and animals. It had been that way for ( hundreds of years. Then new technology brought a change so radical , ( that it is called a revolution. It began in Great Britain and soon spread to j | the United States.	j
The Industrial Revolution
At the beginning of the 1700s, the majority of people in Europe and the United States were farmers. They made most of what they needed by hand. For example, female family members usually made clothing. First, they used a spinning wheel to spin raw materials, such as cotton or wool, into thread. Then they used a hand loom to weave the thread into cloth.
Some families produced extra cloth to sell to merchants, who sold it for a profit. In towns, a few skilled workers made goods by hand in their own shops. These workers included blacksmiths, carpenters, and shoemakers. Their ways of life had stayed the same for generations.
A
Need for Change By the mid-1700s, however, changes in Great Britain led to a greater demand for manufactured goods. As agriculture and roads
384 CHAPTER 12
© After the thread was spun, it moved to the loom to be woven into cloth. Workers called spoolers watched the looms and made sure that the spools of thread were
improved, cities and populations grew. Overseas trade also expanded. Traditional manufacturing methods did not produce enough goods to meet everyone's needs.
People began creating ways to use machines to make things more efficient. These developments led to the Industrial Revolution, a period of rapid growth in using machines for manufacturing and production that began in the mid-1700s.
Textile Industry
The first important breakthrough of the Industrial Revolution took place in how textiles, or cloth items, were made. Before the Industrial Revolution, spinning thread took much more time than making cloth. Several workers were needed to spin enough thread to supply a single weaver.
In 1769 Englishman Richard Arkwright invented a large spinning machine called a water frame. The water frame could produce dozens of cotton threads at the same time. It lowered the cost of cotton cloth and increased the speed of textile production.
The water frame used flowing water as its source of power. Merchants began to build large textile mills, or factories, near rivers and streams. The mills were filled with spinning machines. Merchants began hiring people to work in the mills.
Additional improvements also speeded up the spinning process. Britain soon had the world's most productive textile manufacturing industry.
READING CHECK
Academic
Vocabulary
efficient
productive and not wasteful
Drawing Conclusions How
did machines speed up textile manufacturing?
THE NORTH 31
New Machines and Processes
New machines encouraged the rise of new processes in business and manufacturing. As the machines used to make products became more efficient, the processes involved changed dramatically.
Slater and His Secrets
The new textile machines allowed Great Britain to produce cloth more quickly and inexpensively than other countries could. To protect British industry, the British Parliament had made it illegal for skilled mechanics or machine plans to leave the country. Disguised as a farmer, Samuel Slater, a skilled British mechanic, immigrated to the United States after carefully memorizing the designs of textile mill machines. Soon after arriving, he sent a letter to Moses Brown, who owned a textile business in New England. Slater claimed he could improve the way textiles were manufactured in the United States.
Brown had one of his workers test Slater's knowledge of machinery. Slater passed. Brown's son, Smith Brown, and son-in-law, William Almy, formed a partnership with Slater. In 1793 they opened their
first mill in Pawtucket, Rhode Island. The production of cotton thread by American machines had begun. Slater ran the mill and the machinery. He was confident that his new machines would work well.
If I do not make as good yarn as they do in England, I will have nothing for my services, but will throw the whole of what I have attempted over the bridge/'
—Samuel Slater, quoted in The Ingenious Yankees, by Joseph and Francis Gies
Slater's machines worked, and the Pawtucket mill became a success. Slater's wife also invented a new cotton thread for sewing. In 1798 Slater formed his own company to build a mill. By the time he died in 1835, he owned all or part of 13 textile mills.
Other Americans began building textile mills. Most were located in the Northeast. In New England in particular, merchants had the money to invest in new mills. More important, this region had many rivers and streams that provided a reliable supply of power. Fewer mills were built in the South, partly because investors in the South concentrated on expanding agriculture. There, agriculture was seen as an easier way to make money.
Elements of Mass Production
CONNECT TO ECONOMICS
Mass-production techniques allow manufacturers to efficiently create more goods for the marketplace. Mass production requires the use of interchangeable parts, machine tools, and the division of labor. Why are interchangeable parts important?
Interchangeable Parts
Eli Whitney developed the idea of using interchangeable parts. Interchangeable, or identical, parts are needed so each part does not have to be custom-made by hand.
386 CHAPTER 12
A
Manufacturing Breakthrough Despite these great changes, most manufacturing was still done by hand. In the late 1790s the U.S. government worried about a possible war with France, so it wanted more muskets for the army. Skilled workers made the parts for each weapon by hand. No two parts were exactly alike, and carefully fitting all the pieces together took much time and skill.
As a result, American gun makers could not produce the muskets quickly enough to satisfy the government's demand. Factories needed better technology, the tools used to produce items or to do work.
In 1798 inventor Eli Whitney tried to address some of these problems. Whitney gave officials a proposal for mass-producing guns for the U.S. government using water-powered machinery. Whitney explained the benefits of his ideas.
^1 am persuaded that machinery moved by water [and] adapted to this business would greatly reduce the labor and facilitate [ease] the manufacture of this article.
—Eli Whitney, quoted in Technology in America, edited by Carroll W. Pursell
Whitney also came up with the idea of using interchangeable parts—parts of a machine that are identical. Using interchangeable parts made machines easier to assemble and broken parts easier to replace. Whitney promised to build 10,000 muskets in two years. The federal government gave him money to build his factory, and in 1801 Whitney was called to Washington, D.C., to give a demonstration.
Whitney stood before President John Adams and his secretary of war. He had an assortment of parts for 10 guns. He then randomly chose parts and quickly assembled them into muskets. To the audience's amazement, he repeated the process several times.
Whitney's Influence
Whitney had proven that American inventors could improve upon the new British technology. Machines that produced matching parts soon became standard in industry. Interchangeable parts sped up mass production, the efficient production of large numbers of identical goods.
READING CHECK
Summarizing How did Eli Whitney influence American manufacturing?
THE NORTH 387
Linking to Today
Modern Manufacturing
The word manufacture comes from Latin words that mean "to make by hand." Yet in modern manufacturing, machines—not human hands—do most of the work.
A key feature of modern manufacturing is the assembly line. An assembly line is a long conveyer belt. As the product moves along the belt, or "down the line," workers assemble it. Often, the workers use machines to help them. On a growing number of assembly lines, there are no workers at all: the product is assembled by computer-controlled robots.
Although a far cry from Eli Whitney's factory, modern factories use the same elements of mass production that Whitney did more than 200 years ago.
How do interchangeable parts help the modern assembly line work?
Manufacturing Grows Slowly
Despite the hard work of people such as Samuel Slater and Eli Whitney, manufacturing in the United States grew slowly. Many businesspeople were eager to make their fortune in the new capitalist economy, free from the restrictive British policies of the colonial era, but there were several reasons it was difficult. In 1810 Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin suggested some reasons why there were so few factories in the United States.
" [The reasons include]... the superior attractions of agricultural pursuits [farming],... the abundance of land compared with the population, the high price of labor, and the want [lack] of sufficient capital [investment]/'
—Albert Gallatin, quoted in Who Built America?
by Bruce Levine et al.
Gallatin and others believed that few people would choose to work in a factory if they could own their own farm instead. In Great Britain, on the other hand, land was more scarce and more expensive than in the United States. As a result, fewer people were able to own farms. British factory workers
generally were willing to work for lower wages than factory workers in the United States were.
Because British manufacturers had plenty of factory workers with technical skills, they could produce large amounts of goods less expensively than most American businesses could. As a result, they could charge lower prices for the goods. Lower British prices made it difficult for many American manufacturers to compete with British companies. This situation in turn discouraged American investors from spending the money needed to build new factories and machinery. The new free market economy had not yet reached a balance between the needs of workers, business owners, and consumers that would result in a growing economy. As a result, only a few industries had found a place in the American economy. These included cotton goods, flour milling, weapons, and iron production.
These circumstances began to change around the time of the War of 1812. Since the 1790s, wars between European powers had interfered with U.S. trade. American customers were no longer able to get all the manufactured goods they were used to buying from
388 CHAPTER 12
British and European manufacturers. Then, during the War of 1812, British ships blockaded eastern seaports, preventing foreign ships from delivering goods. Americans began to buy the items they needed from American manufacturers instead of from foreign suppliers. As profits for American factories grew, manufacturers began to spend more money expanding their factories. State banks and private investors began to lend money to manufacturers for their businesses.
At the same time, many Americans began to realize that the United States had been relying too heavily on foreign goods. If the United States could not meet its own needs, it might be weak and open to attack. Former president Thomas Jefferson, who had once opposed manufacturing, changed his mind. He, too, realized that the United States was too dependent on imports.
^To be independent for the comforts of life we must fabricate [make] them ourselves. We must now place the manufacturer by the side of the agriculturalist [farmer]/'
—Thomas Jefferson, from The Writings of Thomas Jefferson, edited by P. L. Ford
In February 1815, New Yorkers celebrated the end of the War of 1812 and the return of free trade. The streets were decorated and filled with merchants whose ships were loaded with goods. "With Peace and Commerce, America Prospers," declared one display. Eager businesspeople prepared to lead the United States into a period of industrial growth. They urged northern politicians to pass higher tariffs on foreign goods to protect American companies. Many southerners, however, feared that tariffs might harm their economy by making imported goods too expensive.
Analyzing How did the War
of 1812 aid the growth of American manufacturing?
READING CHECK .
THE IMPACT
TODAY
I
Summary I
Revolution American dependence on some foreign goods, such as oil, is still being debated today.
AND PREVIEW
The Industrial started with the English textile industry but soon spread to the United States. In the next section you will learn about how factories changed the working lives of Americans. Section 1 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
ONLINE
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What was the first industry to begin to use machines to manufacture goods?
b. Predict In what ways might life for workers change as a result of the Industrial Revolution?
2.	a. Recall In what part of the United States were most mills located? Why?
b.	Draw Conclusions How did the ideas of Samuel Slater and Eli Whitney affect manufacturing in the United States?
c.	Evaluate Whose contributions do you think were more important—Slater's textile machines or Whitney's interchangeable parts? Why?
3.	a. Identify What event encouraged the growth of American manufacturing? Why?
b.	Contrast Why was manufacturing in Great Britain in the early years more successful than that in the United States?
c.	Analyze How would a higher tariff affect the economy of the North?
Critical Thinking
4. Drawing Conclusions Review your notes on key inventions and improvements during the Industrial Revolution. Then copy the chart below and use it to show how each contribution affected manufacturing.
Invention/improvement	Effect on Manufacturing
	
	
	
	
5. Noting Inventions In your notebook, create a three-column chart. In the first column, list any inventions mentioned in this section. In the second column, identify the inventor. In the third column, describe the invention and its benefits.
THE NORTH 31
What You Will Learn.
Changes in l^Forlcing Life
, The spread of mills in the
Northeast changed workers' lives.
, The Lowell System revolutionized the textile industry in the Northeast.
. Workers organized to reform working conditions.
V
If YOU were there...
You live on a dairy farm in Massachusetts in about 1820. On the farm, you get up at dawn to milk the cows, and your work goes on until night. But now you have a chance at a different life. A nearby textile mill is hiring young people. You would leave the farm and live with other workers. You could go to classes. Most important, you could earn money of your own.
Would you go to work in the textile mill? Why?
The Big Idea

The introduction of factories changed working life for many Americans.
Key Terms and People
Rhode Island system, p. 391 Francis Cabot Lowell, p. 392 Lowell system, p. 392 trade unions, p. 394 strikes, p. 394 Sarah G. Bagley, p. 395
BUILDING BACKGROUND
As factories and mills were established, the way people worked changed drastically. One dramatic change was the opportunity that factory work gave to young women. For young women in farm families, it was almost the only chance they had to earn their own money and a measure of independence. hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES S
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on how mills changed workers' lives and how workers organized to fight many of these changes.
Mills Change Workers' Lives
Workers no longer needed the specific skills of craftspeople to run the machines of the new mills. The lives of workers changed along with their jobs. Resistance to these changes sometimes sparked protests.
Many mill owners in the United States could not find enough people to work in factories because other jobs were available. At first, Samuel Slater and his two partners used apprentices—young men who worked for several years to learn the trade. However, they often were given only simple work. For example, their jobs might include feeding cotton into the machines and cleaning the mill equipment. They grew tired of this work and frequently left. Apprentice James Horton, for example, ran away from Slater's mill. "Mr. Slater ... keep me always at one thing...," Horton complained. "I might have stayed there until this time and never knew nothing."
Eventually, Slater began to hire entire families who moved to Pawtucket to work in the mills. This practice allowed Slater to fill his labor needs at a low cost. Children as well as adults worked in the mills.
390 CHAPTER 12
Primary Source
NEWSPAPER ADVERTISEMENT
Family Wanted
This advertisement appeared in a Massachusetts newspaper in 1823.
In it, a company requests that families come to work at a factory.
The practice of hiring entire families was common at the time, especially in Britain. In America, it became known as the Rhode Island system.
The advertisement requests more than one family.

Why do you think Black-stone wants large families?
/
1
V FAMILIES WANTED.
THREE or four Families of large size, and good characters, may find employment at Blackstone Manufactory.
STEPHEN TRIPP,
•dgcnt Bfackstonc JManiifacturiiig Co. _ Mendon* M>v. 27. tf. Drawing Conclusions Do you think advertisements like this one had the effect the companies wanted?
SKILL!
Analyzing Primary sources On most farms children worked to help their families. Therefore, few people complained about the hiring of children to work in factories. H. Humphrey, an author of books on raising children, told parents that children needed to be useful. Humphrey wrote, "If he [a child] will not study, put him on to a farm, or send him into the shop, or in some other way provide regular employment for him." The machines made many tasks in the mill simple enough for children to do. Mill owners profited because they paid children low wages. Adults usually earned as much in a day as most children did in a week.
To attract families to his mill, Slater built housing for the workers. He also provided them with a company store where they could buy necessities. In addition, he started the practice of paying workers with credit at the company store. Instead of paying the full price for an item all at once, small payments could be made over a period of time. This practice allowed Slater to reinvest his money in his business.
Slater's strategy of hiring families and dividing factory work into simple tasks became known as the Rhode Island system. Mill
owners throughout the Northeast copied Slater's methods. Owners advertised with "Men with growing families wanted." They also sent recruiters to poor communities to find new workers. For many people, the chance to work in a factory was a welcome opportunity to earn money and to learn a new skill.
One of the earliest of the mill towns, Slatersville, was named after Samuel Slater. The town was built by Slater and his brother John. It included two houses for workers and their families, the owner's house, the company store, and the Slatersville Mill. The mill was the largest and most modem industrial building of its time.
The mills employed not only the textile workers who operated the machinery but also machine part makers and dam builders. Although the company store sold food and necessary items to workers, mill towns supported the same variety of businesses any other town needed to thrive. These included tailors and dressmakers, butchers, and other small workshops.
Summarizing What problem
did Slater have in his mills, and how did he solve it?
READING CHECK ,
THE NORTH 39'
The Lowell System
Not all mill owners followed this system. Francis Cabot Lowell, a businessman from New England, developed a very different approach. His ideas completely changed the textile industry in the Northeast.
The Lowell system was based on water-powered textile mills that employed young, unmarried women from local farms. The system included a loom that could both spin thread and weave cloth in the same mill. Lowell constructed boardinghouses for the women. Boardinghouse residents were given a room and meals along with their jobs.
With financial support from investors of the Boston Manufacturing Company, Lowell's first textile mill opened in Waltham, Massachusetts, in 1814. "From the first starting of the first power loom there was not... doubt about the success," wrote one investor. In 1822, the company built a larger mill in a Massachusetts town later named Lowell. Visitors to Lowell were amazed by the clean factories and neatly kept boardinghouses as well as the new machinery.
The young millworkers soon became known as Lowell girls. The mills paid them between $2 and $4 each week. The workers paid $1.25 for room and board. These wages were much better than those women could earn per week in other available jobs, such as domestic work.
Many young women came to Lowell from across New England. They wanted the chance to earn money instead of working on the family farm. "I must of course have something of my own before many more years have passed over my head," wrote one young woman. The typical Lowell girl worked at the mills for about four years.
Unlike other factory workers, the Lowell girls were encouraged to use their free time to take classes and form women's clubs. They even wrote their own magazine, the Lowell Offering. Lucy Larcom, who started working at Lowell at age 11, later praised her fellow workers.


lii*
tfgB


$
$
$
No record exists today of the name of this girl, who worked in a mill around 1850. Judging from the photograph, if she were in school today, she would probably be in the seventh or eighth grade. Although hard to see in this photograph, her hands and arms are scratched and swollen-telltale signs of the hard labor required of young girls who worked up to 14 hours
rT—T T-l II .II ! I »ll 11 III T1W	I I . I -| y- -T-n	-	£
Time Table of the Lowell Mills 1
Morning Bells	
First bell		... 4:30 AM
Second bell		... 5:30AM
Third bell			... 6:20 AM
Dinner (Lunch) Bells	
Ring out							.. 12:00 PM
Ring in		.. 12:35 PM
Evening Bells	
Ring out						. . . 6:30 PM
Except on Saturday Evenings	
-The Table of the Lowell Mills, October 21,1851
History Close-up
Life of a Mill Girl
x:
Girls must shout to be heard above the noise of the power looms. Visitors to the mill routinely referred to the sound of the machines as "deafening."
Girls had to keep their hair pulled back so it did not get caught in the machines, resulting in serious injury—or death.
This girl is straightening threads as they enter the power loom, a job that cut her hands.
IS
Windows were rarely opened, to prevent air from blowing the threads. The result is a hot, stuffy room.
The air is dirty and causes breathing problems. One visitor remarked, "The atmosphere... is charged with cotton filaments and dust, which... are very injurious to the lungs."
ANALYZING VISUALS
Judging from the photograph on page 392, what might be the condition of the girl's hands in this illustration? Why?
THE NORTH 393
392 CHAPTER 12
Primary Source
MAGAZINE ARTICLE
Sarah G. Bagley and Workers' Rights
Lowell girl Sarah G. Bagley wrote magazine articles and made speeches about working in the mills. She organized workers to help change conditions.
Bagley says that mill girls work to help their family members.
Bagley believes that most mill girls would leave their jobs if they could.
//IS anyone such a fool as to suppose that out of six thousand factory girls in Lowell, sixty would be there if they could help it? Whenever I raise the point that it is immoral to shut us up in a close room twelve hours a day in the most monotonous and tedious of employment I am told that we have come to the mills voluntarily and we can leave when we will. Voluntarily!..
. the whip which brings us to Lowell is necessity. We must have money; a father's debts are to be paid, an aged mother to be supported, a brother's ambition to be aided and so the factories are supplied. Is this to act from free will?... Is this freedom? To my mind it is slavery//

ANALYSIS
SKILLI
Analyzing Primary Sources How did Bagley view the idea that workers must endure poor conditions?
G.
Bagley, quoted in The Belles of New England: The Women of the Textile Mills and the Families Whose Wealth They Wove, by William Moran
^1 regard it as one of the privileges [advantages] of my youth that I... [grew] up among those active, interesting girls, whose lives... had principle [ideals] and purpose distinctly their own.
—Lucy Larcom, from A New England Girlhood Mill life was hard, however. The work-
day was between 12 and 14 hours long, and daily life was carefully controlled. Ringing bells ordered workers to breakfast or lunch. Employees had to work harder and faster to keep up with new equipment. Cotton dust also began to cause health problems, such as chronic cough, for workers.
THE IMPACT
TODAY
READING CHECK .
In the 1950s, labor union membership reached its peak; about 40 percent of the workforce belonged to unions. Today only about 11 percent of the working population belongs to a labor union.
Contrasting How was the Lowell system different from the Rhode Island system?
Workers Organize
Factories continued to spread in the 1800s. Craftspeople, who made goods by hand, felt threatened. Factories quickly produced low-priced goods. To compete with factories, shop owners had to hire more workers and pay them less. Shoemaker William Frazier complained about the situation in the mid-1840s. "We have to sit on our seats from twelve to sixteen hours per day, to earn one dollar."
The wages of factory workers also went down as people competed for jobs. A wave of immigration in the 1840s brought people from other, poorer countries. They were willing to work for low pay. More immigrants came to the Northeast, where the mills were located, than to the South. Competition for jobs also came from people unemployed during the financial Panic of 1837. For example, about 50,000 workers in New York City alone lost their jobs.
The Beginning of Trade Unions
Facing low wages and the fear of losing their jobs, skilled workers formed trade unions, groups that tried to improve pay and working conditions. Eventually, unskilled factory workers also formed trade unions. Most employers did not want to hire union workers. Employers believed that the higher cost of union employees prevented competition with other manufacturers.
Sometimes labor unions staged protests called strikes. Workers on strike refuse to work until employers meet their demands. Most early strikes were not successful, however. Courts and police usually supported companies, not striking union members.
394 CHAPTER 12
Labor Reform Efforts
A strong voice in the union movement was that of millworker Sarah G. Bagley. She founded the Lowell Female Labor Reform Association in 1844 and publicized the struggles of factory laborers. The association's two main goals were to influence an investigation of working conditions by the Massachusetts state legislature and to obtain a 10-hour workday. Members of the association passed out pamphlets and circulated petitions.
President Martin Van Buren had granted a 10-hour workday in 1840 for many federal employees. Bagley wanted this rule to apply to employees of private businesses. These men and women often worked 12 to 14 hours per day, six days per week.
Many working men and women supported the 10-hour-workday campaign, despite the opposition of business owners. In 1845 Sarah Bagley was elected vice president of the New England Working Men's Association. She was the first woman to hold such a high-ranking position in the American labor movement.
Over time, the unions achieved some concrete legal victories. Connecticut, Maine, New Hampshire, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and a few other states passed 10-hour-workday laws.
For factory workers in other states, long hours remained common. One witness described how children were "summoned by the factory bell before daylight" and worked until eight o'clock at night "with nothing but [a] recess of forty-five minutes to get their dinner." Union supporters continued to fight for work reforms such as an end to child labor in factories during the 1800s.
READING CHECK
Academic
Vocabulary
concrete
specific, real
Finding Main Ideas
Why did workers form unions, and what were the main goals of union reformers?
Summary and Preview with the growth of factories, workers faced new opportunities and challenges. In the next section you will learn about how the Transportation Revolution brought changes to commerce and the daily lives of Americans.
Section 2 Assessment
; Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1. a. Identify What problems did many mill owners have in finding workers?
I b. Analyze How did Samuel Slater's Rhode Island i system change employment practices in mills? How
did it increase industrialization?
1	2. a. Describe What was life like for mill workers in
I	the Lowell system?
b. Make Inferences Why would young women • have wanted to go to work in the Lowell mills?
3.	a. Recall Why did workers form trade unions?
b. Predict What are some possible problems that :	might arise between factory owners and trade unions?
f Critical Thinking
4.	Drawing Conclusions Review your notes on mills and workers' reactions to them. Then copy the
; graphic organizer to the right and use it to show
hmhsocialstudies.com
how Slater, Lowell, and Sarah G. Bagley affected workers'lives.
5. Examining Working Conditions This section tells about mill life and conditions for workers. In the j chart you started for the first section, list the two » labor systems used by mills, the person who devel- j oped each, and the benefits of each system.	j
THE NORTH 31
TEKS 11A,11B,13B, 18B,18C,27A, 27B, 27C, 27D,28A
What You Will Learn... J
1.	The Transportation Revolution affected trade and daily life.
2.	The steamboat was one of the first developments of the Transportation Revolution.
3.	Railroads were a vital part of the Transportation Revolution.
4.	The Transportation Revolu-
tion brought many changes to American life and industry.
; New forms of transportation improved business, travel, and communication in the United
; States.
..... :........................J
Key Terms and People
Transportation Revolution, p. 396 Robert Fulton, p. 397 Clermont, p. 397 Gibbons v. Ogden, p. 397 Peter Cooper, p. 398
hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to create a time line with the key events in the development of transportation.
The Transportation IRovoIution
If YOU were there...
You live in a small town in Iowa in the 1860s. You've never been more than 30 miles from home and have always traveled by wagon or on horseback. Now there are plans to build a railroad westward from Chicago, 200 miles to the east. The tracks will come through your town! Twice a week, trains will bring goods from the city and take people farther west.
How would the railroad change your life?
I BUILDING BACKGROUND
The Industrial Revolution changed how I goods were made. It brought great changes in the ways that many * Americans lived. But developments in technology led to major changes f in other areas of life, too. Newforms of transportation would bring » remote parts of America closer together. 
Trade and Daily Life
During the 1800s the United States was transformed by a Transportation Revolution—a period of rapid growth in the speed and convenience of travel because of new methods of transportation. The Transportation Revolution created a boom in business across the country, particularly by reducing shipping time and costs. As one foreign observer declared in 1835, "The Americans ... have joined the Hudson to the Mississippi, and made the Atlantic Ocean communicate with the Gulf of Mexico."
These improvements were made possible largely by the invention of two new forms of transportation: the steamboat and steam-powered trains. They enabled goods, people, and information to travel rapidly and efficiently across the United States. Suddenly people across the nation could buy manufactured items and even food products unavailable to them before. This boosted industry and agriculture, which created a need for more labor. In the North this meant that more people could find jobs in factories. In the South, slavery became even more important to support the
396 CHAPTER 12
economy. Steam-powered ships soon connected the United States with European mar kets, spurring the economy even more.
READING CHECK ,
Finding Main Ideas What benefits did the Transportation Revolution bring to trade and daily life?
Steamboats
American and European inventors had developed steam-powered boats in the late 1700s. However, they were not in wide use until the early 1800s.
Steamboat Era
In 1803 American Robert Fulton tested his first steamboat design in France. Several years later, he tested the first full-sized commercial steamboat, called the Clermont, in the United States. On August 9,1807, the Clermont traveled against the current up the Hudson River without trouble. Demand for steamboat ferry service soon arose.
The steamboat was well suited for river
travel. It could move upriver and did not rely
on wind power. Steamboats increased trade
and profits because goods could be moved quickly and thus more cheaply. More than 500 steamboats were in use in the United States by 1840. By the 1850s, steamboats were also being used to carry people and goods across the Atlantic Ocean.
Gibbons v. Ogden
Increased steamboat shipping led to conflict over waterway rights. In 1819 Aaron Ogden sued Thomas Gibbons for operating steamboats in New York waters that Ogden said he owned. Gibbons did not have a license to operate in New York, but argued that his federal license gave him the right to use New York waterways.
In the case of Gibbons v. Ogden, which reached the Supreme Court in 1824, the Court reinforced the federal government's authority to regulate trade between the states by ending monopolistic control over waterways in several states. The ruling freed up waters to even greater trade and shipping. Almost
THE NORTH 3!
overnight there were many more shipping companies traveling the waterways. Competition between the businesses brought prices down, and more people could afford to buy the products brought to their local markets.
Reading Check
Summarizing Explain the effects of the Gibbons v. Ogden ruling.
American Railroads
O
HISTORY
VIDEO
Wild West Tech: Train Tech
hmhsocialstudies.com!
What the steamboat did for water travel, the train did for overland travel. Steam-powered trains had first been developed in Great Britain in the early 1800s. However, they did not become popular in the United States until the 1830s. In 1830 Peter Cooper built a small but powerful locomotive called the Tom Thumb. He raced the locomotive against a horse-drawn railcar. Eyewitness John Latrobe later described the race, in which Tom Thumb had a slow start and fell behind. Latrobe wrote, "The pace increased, the passengers shouted, the engine gained on the horse ... then the engine passes the horse, and a great hurrah hailed the victory." Unfortunately for Coo-
per, victory was spoiled when Tom Thumb broke down and lost the race near the end.
Despite the defeat, the contest showed the power and speed of even a small locomotive. Railroad fever soon spread. By 1840 railroad companies had laid about 2,800 miles of track—more than existed in all of Europe. French economist Michel Chevalier described Americans as having "a perfect passion for railroads."
As more railroads were built, engineers and mechanics overcame many tough challenges. Most British railroads, for example, ran on straight tracks across flat ground. In the United States, however, many railroads had to run up and down steep mountains, around tight curves, and over swift rivers. Railroad companies also built the tracks quickly and often with the least expensive materials available. As time went on, engineers and mechanics built heavier, faster, and more powerful steam locomotives.
By 1860 about 30,000 miles of railroad linked almost every major city in the eastern United States. As a result, the economy surged forward. For example, American loco-
The Steam Train
CONNECT TO SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Boiling water produces steam, which pushes pistons back and forth in a steam engine. These pistons are connected to rods that rotate the wheels of the locomotive.
Why does the train have a firebox?
As steam follows the path of the white arrows into the cylinder, the pressure pushes the piston in the direction of the large blue arrow. Connecting rods turn the wheel half a turn.
Q
When the small valve rod moves, the other valve is blocked, pushing steam into the other side of the cylinder. The pressure moves the piston in the direction of the large blue arrow and the wheel completes a turn. 398 CHAPTER 12
motives hauled more freight than those in any other country. The railroad companies quickly became some of the most powerful businesses in the nation. As the railroad system grew, manufacturers and farmers could send their goods to distant markets.
In addition to their tremendous economic impact, the railroads made a powerful impression on the senses of passengers and observers. Trains were the fastest form of transportation most people had ever experienced. While wagons often traveled less than 2 miles per hour, locomotives averaged about 20 miles per hour. Writer George Templeton Strong of New York City described the thrill of a steam train passing by in the night:
^Whizzing and rattling and panting, with its fiery furnace gleaming in front, its chimney vomiting fiery smoke above, and its long train of cars rushing along behind like the body and tail of a
gigantic dragon—... and all darting forward at the rate of twenty miles an hour. Whewl"
—George Templeton Strong, quoted in The Market Revolution by Charles Sellers
Riding on the early trains was often an adventure, but it could also be quite dangerous. Engineers trying to stay on time sometimes traveled too fast. English citizen Charles Richard Weld was on a railroad car that flew off the tracks. To his amazement, the other passengers did not complain about the accident. Instead, they praised the engineer for trying to keep on schedule!
Passengers accepted such risks because the railroads reduced travel time dramatically. Railroads also helped tie communities together. In 1847 Senator Daniel Webster spoke for many people in the United States when he declared that the railroad "towers above all other inventions of this or the preceding age."
THE IMPACT
TODAY
In 1883 four standard time zones were introduced in the United States to help railroads offer uniform train schedules. Today travelers might cross one or more time zones in a single airplane flight.
READING CHECK
Drawing Inferences In
what ways did railroads affect the economy of the United States?
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
1.	Region Where were most railroads located in 1850?
2.	Human-Environment Interaction How does this map suggest that people modified the landscape?
—	
	p Railroad
C°a'	m be r	
0	150	300 Miles
1	1— 0	150	300 Kilometers
—		J
*/J O * * i
Transportation Revolution Brings Changes
The Transportation Revolution brought many changes to America. Steamboats and railroads made getting goods to distant markets much easier and less costly. International markets expanded, and Europe began to rely on southern cotton for its textile industry. People in all areas of the nation now had access to products made and grown far away. More than ever before, there was a national economy. The wealth, however, was centered in the North. The structure of the economy adjusted with the increase in availability of goods. The relationship between customers, business owners, and workers changed as people had more money to buy an increased selection of items. Both factory and agricultural workers were able to call for higher wages.
Railroads contributed to the expansion of the borders of the nation and guided
population growth. Towns sprang up at railroad junctions. Those towns that did not have railroads nearby suffered. Cities grew as trains brought new residents and raw materials for industry and construction. The growing prosperity of the nation, especially in the North, encouraged Americans to take pride in their country.
A
New Fuel The Transportation Revolution also increased the use of certain natural resources that had not been important until then. Throughout the early Transportation Revolution, wood was the primary source of fuel for trains and steamboats, as well as for cooking, light, and heat. As faster locomotives were built, coal replaced wood as the main source of power. A half ton of coal produces as much energy as two tons of wood but at half the cost. Coal also became popular for heating homes. Railroads transported the coal from mines to towns and cities.
400 CHAPTER 12
As the demand for coal increased, a coalmining industry developed in many states, including Pennsylvania, western Virginia, and Illinois. Coal mining changed the landscape in a number of ways. New towns, such as Coal City and Carbondale in Illinois, sprang up in places where coal deposits could be mined. Miners made deep gashes in the earth removing the coal.
Later, in the 1870s, the demand for coal increased as the demand for steel grew. Steel is made through a smelting process—heating iron ore to very high temperatures. Coal was used to fire the furnaces. Steel, which is much stronger than iron, was increasingly used to build factories and the machines they produced. Steel was also used to make the rails that trains ride on.
The growing market for steel helped fuel the need for more railroads. Railroads transported steel to places where new factories were being built. Railroads also brought new steel farming tools and machines to farmers in the Midwest. Using the new equipment, farmers produced more crops. Railroads then transported their harvests to markets.
Effects of Railroads
The railroads also played a role in the growth of other businesses. The logging industry expanded as people in the growing towns and cities needed wood for houses and furniture. Lumber items became the primary product of New England. Settlers spreading out across the Midwest cut down trees and plowed up prairies to make farmland. Deforestation, or cutting down and removing trees, took place on a large scale.
Railroads also caused cities to grow. Some cities became transportation hubs. Chicago was one such city. Its location on Lake Michigan made it an ideal transportation hub, linking the Midwest to the East and South.
READING CHECK .
FOCUS ON
Reading What causes and effects do you see in this section?
Analyzing Information
What role did railroads play in the coal industry?
I
Summary and Preview The Transpor-I tation Revolution changed the way business was done. In the next section you will learn about more technological advances. Section 3 Assessment
-71 hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What forms of transportation were improved or invented at this time?
b. Explain What effect did the Transportation Revolution have on the United States?
2.	a. Describe What were the benefits of steamboat travel? b. Analyze Summarize the issues behind Gibbons v. Ogden, what the decision was, and the significance of the decision. What effect did the ruling have on federal government?
3.	a. Describe What event showed the power and speed of locomotives?
b.	Draw Conclusions How did railroads affect trade and business in the United States?
c.	Elaborate Why do you think Americans were fascinated by railroads?
4.	a. Describe What physical obstacles did railroad construction in the United States face?
b. Analyze What effects did the Transportation
Revolution have on the U.S. economy?
c. Elaborate Do you think the Transportation Revolution played a role in deforestation? Explain.
Critical Thinking
5. Identifying Effects Review your time line on the steamboat and the locomotive. Then copy the chart below and use it to show how they affected business, travel, and communication in the United States.
Steamboat		K	Effects
			
Locomotive		y	
^WriteSmart ;
6. Describing Travel Inventions Add the steamboat and locomotive to your list. Note the individuals involved in their development as well as how these new methods of travel changed life for people in the United States.
THE NORTH 41
SECTION

4
TEKS 12C, 12D, 13B, 14B,27A, 27B, 27D, 28A
Wfllor© Technological Advances
What You Will Learn...
1.	The telegraph made swift communication possible from coast to coast.
2.	With the shift to steam power, businesses built new factories closer to cities and transportation centers.
3.	Improved farm equipment and other labor-saving devices made life easier for many Americans.
4.	New inventions changed lives in American homes.
If YOU were there...
You own a small shop in Chicago, Illinois, in the 1850s. You sell ladies'hats and gowns. When you need more hats, you send a letter to the manufacturer in New York. Sometimes it takes weeks for the letter to get there. One day, the owner of the shop next door tells you about a wonderful new machine. It can send orders from Chicago to New York in just minutes!
How would a machine like this change your business?
T
Advances in technology led to new inventions that continued to change daily life and work.
................-.-......- ...........................—
BUILDING BACKGROUND
The Industrial and Transportation I Revolutions had far-reaching effects on Americans' lives. They led to i still more innovations in technology. Some of the new machines and devices speeded up processes for business owners. Others made life easier for people at home.
Key Terms and People
Samuel F. B. Morse, p. 402 telegraph, p. 402 Morse code, p. 403 John Deere, p. 404 Cyrus McCormick, p. 404 Isaac Singer, p. 405
Telegraph Speeds Communication
In 1832 Samuel F. B. Morse perfected the telegraph—a device that could send information over wires across great distances. To develop the telegraph, Morse studied electricity and magnetism. In time, Morse put the work of other scientists together in a practical machine.
hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the new advances in technology listed in this section.
Time Line
402 CHAPTER 12
The telegraph sent pulses, or surges, of electric current through a wire. The telegraph operator tapped a bar that controlled the length of each pulse. At the other end of the wire, these pulses were changed into clicking sounds. A short click was called a dot. A long click was called a dash. Morse's partner, Alfred Lewis Vail, developed a system known as Morse code—different combinations of dots and dashes that represent each letter of the alphabet. For example, dot dot dot, dash dash dash, dot dot dot is the distress signal called SOS.
Several years passed before Morse was able to connect two locations with telegraph wires. People doubted his machine. Some did not think that he was reading messages sent from miles away.
Morse's break came during the 1844 Democratic National Convention. A telegraph wired news of the presidential candidate's nomination to politicians in Washington. The waiting politicians responded, "Three cheers for the telegraph!" Telegraphs were soon sending and receiving information for businesses, the government, newspapers, and private citizens.
The telegraph grew with the railroad. Telegraph companies strung their wires on poles along railroads across the country. They established telegraph offices in many train stations. Thousands of miles of telegraph line were added every year in the 1850s. The first transcontinental line was finished

Samuel F. B. Morse
(1791-1872)
Like steamboat creator Robert Fulton, Samuel F. B. Morse began his career as a painter rather than as an inventor. In 1832 Morse was a widower struggling to raise his three children alone. He became interested in the idea of sending messages electrically. Morse hoped he could invent a device that would earn enough to support his family. Eventually, the telegraph made Morse extremely wealthy.
Drawing Conclusions What motivated Morse to invent the telegraph?
in 1861. By the time he died in 1872, Morse was famous across the United States.
With the spread of telegraph lines, people could relay information and news more quickly. The economy of the nation became even more unified as businesses used the telegraph to conduct financial transactions with distant partners. Cities, especially in the West, grew rapidly because of the increased economic opportunities available to distant businesses. The territories of the United States began filling with people farther and farther west.
READING CHECK .
Identifying Cause and Effect
What effect did the telegraph have on cross-country communications?
Steam-Powered Factories
During the Industrial Revolution, factories began to rely on steam power instead of waterpower. This shift brought major changes to the nation's industries. Water-powered factories had to be built near streams or waterfalls. In contrast, steam power allowed business owners to build factories almost anywhere. Yet the Northeast was still home to most of the nation's industry. By 1860 New England alone had as many factories as the entire South did.
Some companies decided to build their factories closer to cities and transportation centers. This provided easier access to workers, allowing businesses to lower wages. Being closer to cities also reduced shipping costs. Cities soon became the center of industrial growth. People from rural areas and foreign countries flocked to the cities for jobs.
Factory workers improved the designs of many kinds of machines. Mechanics invented tools that could cut and shape metal, stone, and wood with great precision. By the 1840s this new machinery was able to produce interchangeable parts. Within a short period of time, the growing machine-tool industry was even making customized equipment.
New businesses were also aided by government policies that favored free trade. There was little regulation of businesses, and taxes were designed to benefit business owners. Many Americans supported these governmental policies because they want-
READING CHECK .
ed to benefit from the growing economy themselves. Thousands of new businesses were established, many to market the new inventions that were being introduced every day. Although these businesses often failed, they spurred technological innovation and entrepreneurship.
Finding Main Ideas What
changes resulted from the shift to steam power?
Improved Farm Equipment
During the 1830s, technology began transforming the farm as well as the factory. In 1837 blacksmith John Deere saw that friends in Illinois had difficulty plowing thick soil with iron plows. He thought a steel blade might work better. His design for a steel plow was a success. By 1846 Deere was selling 1,000 plows per year.
In 1831 Cyrus McCormick developed a new harvesting machine, the mechanical reaper, which quickly and efficiently cut down wheat. He began mass producing his reapers in a Chicago factory. McCormick used new methods to encourage sales. His company advertised, gave demonstrations, and provided a repair and spare parts department. He also let customers buy on credit.
The combination of Deere's plow and McCormick's reaper allowed Midwestern farmers to plant and harvest huge crop fields. By 1860, U.S. farmers were producing more than 170 million bushels of wheat and more than 800 million bushels of corn per year.
American Inventions (continued)


1849 Walter Hunt invents the safety pin.
asas
r»e. i. c
1851 Isaac Singer Improves the sewing machine. The production * and repair of clothing becomes much easier.
Fizz.
PaferiZecZ./fytr-/o-/84<i t<g.i
WABTSR WHB.
w HEW VOKK. ™ MCBABDa0 DBSSW®-



READING CHECK
Summarizing What marketing methods did McCormick use to help sell his farm equipment?
Changing Life at Home
Many inventions of the Industrial Revolu-J
selling for only $1.50 by the 1850s. Additional useful items created during this period include matches, introduced in the 1830s, and the safety pin, invented in 1849. All of these inventions helped make life at home more convenient for Americans.
THE IMPACT
TODAY
tion simply made life easier. When Alexis de Tocqueville of France visited the United States in the early 1830s, he identified what he called a very American quality.
^[Americans want] to be always making life more comfortable and convenient, to avoid trouble, and to satisfy the smallest wants [desires] without effort and almost without cost/'
—Alexis de Tocqueville, from Democracy in America
READING CHECK
Analyzing How did labor-saving inventions affect daily life?
I
Summary and Preview New machines I and inventions changed the way Americans lived and did business in the early 1800s. In the next chapter you will learn how agri- cultural changes affected the South.
New inventions, such as cell phones, laptop computers, and wireless Internet, continue to make life easier and more convenient for people today.
The sewing machine, first invented by Elias Howe, a factory apprentice in Lowell, Massachusetts, was one of these conveniences. Isaac Singer then made improvements to Howe's design. Like McCormick, Singer allowed customers to buy his machines on credit and provided service. By 1860 Singer's company was the world's largest maker of sewing machines.
Other advances improved on everyday items. In the 1830s, iceboxes cooled by large blocks of ice became available. Iceboxes stored fresh food safely for longer periods. Iron cookstoves began replacing cooking fires and stone hearths.
Companies also began to mass produce earlier inventions. This allowed many families to buy household items, such as clocks, that they could not afford in the past. For example, a clock that cost $50 in 1800 was
Section 4 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
ONLINE QUIZ
Reviewing ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Describe How did the telegraph work?
b.	Predict What impact might the telegraph have on the future of the United States?
c.	Analyze How did the telegraph increase urbanization?
2.	a. Describe How did water-powered factories differ from steam-powered factories?
b.	Explain How did the shift to steam power lead to the growth of cities?
c.	Explain What governmental policies helped industries grow in a free trade system? What were the benefits of this system?
3.	a. Identify What contributions did Cyrus McCormick and John Deere make to farming?
b. Analyze What effect did new inventions have on agriculture in the United States?
4.	a. Identify What inventions improved life at home?
b. Evaluate Which invention do you think had the greatest effect on the daily lives of Americans? Why?
1859 Manufactured goods become more valuable than agricultural goods in the country's ■ economy for the first time. The United States is becoming a modern industrial nation.
Critical Thinking 5. Supporting a Point of
View Review your notes on technological advances and their effects. Then create a
Most Important	Why
	
graphic organizer like the one below that shows the top three advances you think are most important and why.
”>'WriteSmart
ANALYSIS
SKILLI
Reading Time Lines Which two inventions improved American agriculture?
6. Describing Technological Advances Add notes about the inventions mentioned in this section to your chart. Think about which invention you will use for your advertisement.
THE
aveiuseuieiu. j gn : NORTH 409U
—ffl
Bias
[ Define the Skill
Everyone has firmly held beliefs. However, when we let our beliefs automatically slant or shape our point of view on topics, we may be showing bias. Bias is a fixed idea or opinion about someone or something. Some bias is based on a set of ideas about a group to which the person or thing belongs. This type of bias is called a stereotype. If the group is defined by race, religion, age, gender, or similar characteristics, the bias is known as prejudice.
Learn the Skill
Not all beliefs are biases, even if those beliefs are strongly held. Biases are beliefs that have little or no evidence to support them. The more unreasonable a person's view is in light of facts and evidence, the more likely it is that the belief is a bias.
Another characteristic of bias is the person's reluctance to question his or her belief if it is challenged by evidence. Sometimes people stubbornly cling to views that overwhelming evidence proves wrong. This is why bias is defined as a "fixed" idea or opinion. One of the most damaging effects of bias, and a good reason for trying to avoid it, is that it can prevent us from learning new things.
Bias sometimes appears in written, oral, and visual material. Authors may include bias accidentally or in order to sway people's opinions on a topic. To recognize bias in a source, you can follow the steps below.
1.	Identify the author or creator of the source. Consider the author's background and determine if he or she is an authority on the topic.
2.	Identify the author's purpose, point of view, and frame of reference. Information about the author and the source may help you determine the source's reliability and validity.
3.	Examine the language used in the source.
Look for stereotypes and opinions in the source. Sources that lack objectivity and specific facts may be biased.
4.	Determine if the source is valid and reliable. Compare the source with other information on the topic to determine whether the source contains more facts or more opinions.
Practice the Skill
In 1834 Tennessee congressman Davy Crockett visited the textile mills at Lowell, Massachusetts. Read his account of the "Lowell girls" who worked in the factory and answer the questions below.
Here are thousands [of young women], useful to others,
... with the prospect before them of future comfort and respectability... There are more than five thousand females employed in Lowell; and when you come to see the amount of labour performed by them, in superintending [operating] the different machinery, you will be astonished/'*
1.	What facts can be confirmed from this source?
2.	What opinions are found in this source?
3.	Do you think this source is biased? Explain your answer.
406 CHAPTER 12
visual nummary
Use the visual summary below to help you review the main ideas of the chapter.
INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
•	Mass production
•	Interchangeable parts
•The Lowell and Rhode Island systems

TRANSPORTATION
REVOLUTION
Factories
Telegraph
I II II II
Railroad and Steamboat

Reviewing Vocabulary,
Terms, and People
Complete each sentence below by filling in the blank with the correct term or person from the chapter.
1.	The system of________was developed to
represent letters of the alphabet when sending telegraph messages.
2.	The first American woman to hold a high-ranking position in the labor movement was _
3.	The____________was a period of rapid growth
in the use of machines and manufacturing.
4.	The first locomotive in the United States was
built by____________________________________.
5.	Workers would sometimes go on___________to
force factory owners to meet their demands for better pay and working conditions.
6.	The____________industry, which produced
cloth items, was the first to use machines for manufacturing.
Comprehension and
Critical Thinking
SECTION 1 (Pages 384-389)
7.	a. Identify What ideas did Eli Whitney want to apply to the manufacture of guns?
b.	Analyze How did the War of 1812 lead to a boom in manufacturing in the United States?
c.	Elaborate Why do you think the Industrial Revolution began in Great Britain rather than in the United States?
SECTION 2 (Pages 390-395)
8.	a. Describe What was mill life like?
b.	Draw Conclusions How did the Rhode Island system and the Lowell system change the lives of American workers?
c.	Evaluate Were reformers such as Sarah G. Bagley effective in improving labor conditions? Why?
THE NORTH 41
SECTION 3 (Pages 396-401)
9.	a. Describe How were Americans affected by the introduction of steamboats?
b.	Make Inferences How did railroad companies become some of the most powerful businesses in the country?
c.	Elaborate What was the most important result of the Transportation Revolution? Why?
SECTION 4 (Pages 402-405)
10.	a. Recall What important change took place in how factories were powered?
b.	Draw Conclusions How did the telegraph affect communication in the United States?
c.	Evaluate Do you think moving factories close to cities helped or hurt working life? Explain.
Reviewing Themes
11.	Science and Technology How did the introduction of new inventions change the way goods were made and sold in the United States?
12.	Science and Technology What effects did the technological innovations of the Industrial Revolution have on daily life in the United States? Give specific examples.
13.	Economics What was the overall effect of the Industrial Revolution on the U.S. economy?
Using the Internet
14.	Activity: Marketing Plan The Industrial Revolution changed the way goods were produced. New inventions created easier, faster, or completely new ways of doing things. Using the online textbook, research inventions made between 1790 and 1860. Then create a plan for how to sell one of the inventions. In your plan, identify the problems the invention will fix, your target audience, and how the invention should be advertised and sold.
’71 hmhsocialstudies.com!
Reading Skills
Causes and Effects in History Use the Reading Skills taught in this chapter to answer the question about the reading selection below.
Many young women came to Lowell from across New England. They wanted the chance to earn money instead of working on the family farm. (p. 392)
---——J
15.	According to the passage above, what was a cause for moving to Lowell?
a.	working long hours
b.	earning money
c.	meeting people
d.	working on a farm
Social Studies Skills
Identifying Bias Use the Social Studies Skills taught in this chapter to answer the question about the reading selection below.
"is anyone such a fool as to suppose that out of six thousand factory girls in Lowell, sixty would be there if they could help it?
G.
Bagley, quoted in The Belles of New England by William Moran 16.	Do you think that Bagley's opposition to the Lowell system was unfairly biased? Why or why not?
"’J'WriteSmart
17.	Writing Your Newspaper Advertisement Look over your chart, and choose one invention for your advertisement. Then answer these questions to help you plan your advertisement: Who is your audience? Who will buy this invention? How will the invention benefit this audience? What words or phrases will best persuade this audience? Once you have answered these questions, design your advertisement. To draw readers' attention to your ad, include an illustration, a catchy heading, and a few lines of text.
408
CHAPTER
12
Texas Test Practice
DIRECTIONS:
Read each question and write the letter of the best response. 1	The first machines of the Industrial Revolution were powered by
A electricity.
B water.
C animals.
0 coal.
2	The earliest important evidence of the Industrial Revolution in America was found in
F the way cotton was processed for market.
G the production of tobacco products.
H the manufacture of cloth and thread.
J the construction of the first steam railroads.
3	Which of the following was a development of the Transportation Revolution of the mid-1800s?
A automobiles B wind-powered boats C diesel freighters D steam-powered trains
4	What change in technology allowed business owners to sell their goods in markets across the country?
F the Lowell system G the growth of railroads H the invention of the telegraph J the Arkwright system
5	Eli Whitney’s idea of interchangeable parts resulted in
A the dominance of American manufacturing.
B the beginning of the Industrial Revolution.
C a rapid expansion of railroads.
D the mass production of goods.
6	The inventions of John Deere and Cyrus McCormick
F improved communication.
G introduced two new factory labor systems.
H helped increase agricultural production in the
United States.
J led to manufacturing breakthroughs in the textile industry.
7	Read the following passage written by a textile worker and use it to answer the question below.
/zThe little money I could earn—one dollar a week, besides the price of my board— was needed in the family, and I must return [from home] to the mill... I began to reflect on life rather seriously for a girl of twelve or thirteen. What was I here for? What would I make of myself? ... We did not forget that we were working girls ... clearing away a few weeds from the overgrown track of independent labor for other women ... [so that] no real odium [disrespect] could be attached to any honest toil that any self-respecting woman might undertake."
A
New England Girlhood by Lucy Larcom (1824-1893) Document-Based Question How did Larcom see the role of women changing in the workforce?
THE NORTH 40
CHAPTER
1790-1860
Essential Question
How did slavery and agriculture affect the economy and society of the South?
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS)
A, 12A, 12B, 23A, 23C, 23D, 26A, 26B, 27A, 27D, 28A, 29A, 29C,
29H, 291,29J
SECTION 1: Growth of the Cotton Industry.......................414
The Big Idea The invention of the cotton gin made the South a one-crop economy and increased the need for slave labor.
SECTION 2: Southern Society....................................420
The Big Idea Southern society centered around agriculture.
SECTION 3: The Slave System....................................424
The Big Idea The slave system in the South produced harsh living conditions and occasional rebellions.
cus on Writing
"’J'WriteSmart
Biographical Sketch In this chapter you will learn about life in the South during the first half of the nineteenth century. Read the chapter, and then write a two-paragraph biographical sketch about a day in the life of a person living on a large cotton farm in the South. You might choose to write about a wealthy male landowner, his wife, or an enslaved man or woman working on the farm. As you read, think about what life would have been like for the different people who lived and worked on the farm. Take notes about farm life in your notebook.
