Summary and Preview as the united I States grew, so did a unique national identity. In Chapter 10 you will read about the changing face of American democracy.
Section 3 Assessment
j Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Describe What topics interested American writers in the early 1800s?
b. Draw Conclusions Why is Washington Irving
; considered an important American writer?
2.	a. Identify What influence did the Hudson River School and Thomas Cole have on American painters? b. Describe How did American painting styles change from the early period to the mid-1800s?
3.	a. Describe What effect did religious revivalism have i on American music?
b. Elaborate Why do you think folk songs like "Hunters of Kentucky" were popular?
J 4. a. Identify On what historical examples did many ’ American architects model their buildings?
;	b. Predict What might be some possible results of the
>	growing interest in education in the United States?
Critical Thinking
J 5. Categorizing Review your notes about new developments in American culture. Copy the graphic organizer
i below and use it to show how these cultural develop-? ments reflected a new American identity.
ANALYSIS
SKILL!
Analyzing Information Cultural Development
New Identity
How do these artistic developments show Americans' increasing sense of identity?
Cultural Development
Cultural Development
New Identity
New Identity
6. Identifying Values You can tell much about someone's values by what that person makes. For instance, you could guess that a person who creates a collage of personal mementos for a friend's birthday is creative and values personal relationships. Take notes on what the United States created and what it valued.
A NEW NATIONAL IDENTITY 311
^Literaturein History
1
Literature of the
American

Guided Reading
Word Help__________________ j
accoutrements dress and	;
gear	j
rude crude, rough	'j
attenuated made thin	|
indurated hardened unremitted ongoing	1
gartered fastened ingenious clever	1
O
What do you learn about 1 Natty Bumppo in the first | paragraph?	\
j
© A "girdle of wampum" is a belt strung with beads. j Wampum were used by Native Americans for both j money and decoration.
Make a list of the items	|
Bumppo wears and carries. i What does each item suggest ; about him?
Frontier
from The Last of the Mohicans
by James Fenimore Cooper (1789-1851)
About the Reading The Last of the Mohicans is one of five novels known as the Leatherstocking Tales. These novels follow the life and adventures of American pioneer Natty Bumppo (also known as Leatherstocking, Hawkeye, and the Deerslayer). Bumppo is the perfect woodsman: resourceful, honest, kind to both his friends and his enemies, but always a loner at heart.
AS YOU READ ,
Try to imagine what Natty Bumppo looks like.
On that day, two men were lingering on the banks of a small but rapid stream ... While one of these loiterers showed the red skin and wild accoutrements of a native of the woods, the other exhibited, through the mask of his rude and nearly savage equipments, the brighter though sunburnt and long-faded complexion of one who might claim descent from a European parentage. O
The frame of the white man, judging by such parts as were not concealed by his clothes, was like that of one who had known hardships and exertion from his earliest youth. His person, though muscular, was rather attenuated than full; but every nerve and muscle appeared strung and indurated by unremitted exposure and toil. He wore a hunting shirt of forest green, fringed with faded yellow, and a summer cap of skins which had been shorn of their fur. He also bore a knife in a girdle of wampum, © like that which confined the scanty garments of the Indian, but no tomahawk. His moccasins were ornamented after the ... fashion of the natives, while the only part of his underdress which appeared below the hunting frock was a pair of buckskin leggings that laced at the sides, and which were gartered above the knees with the sinews of a deer. A pouch and horn completed his personal accoutrements, though a rifle of great length, which the theory of the more ingenious whites had taught them was the most dangerous of all firearms, leaned against a neighboring sapling.
from The Legend of Sleepy Hollow
by Washington Irving (1783-1859)
About the Reading "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow" has been called one of the first American short stories. Even though it is based on an old German folktale, its setting, a small village in the Hudson River valley, is American through and through. Irving's knack for capturing the look and the feel of the region made the story instantly popular—as did the tale's eerie central character, a horseman without a head.
Guided Reading
WORD HELP______________
dominant prevailing; ruling apparition a ghostlike form that appears suddenly collating comparing spectre ghost allege to firmly state purport sense; gist
AS YOU READ
Try to picture both the ghost and the setting.
The dominant spirit, however, that haunts this enchanted region, and seems to be commander in chief of all the powers of the air, is the apparition of a figure on horseback without a head. It is said by some to be the ghost of a Hessian trooper, O whose head had been carried away by a cannon ball, in some nameless battle during the revolutionary war, and who is ever and anon seen by the country folk, hurrying along in the gloom of night, as if on the wings of the wind. His haunts are not confined to the valley, but extend at times to the adjacent roads, and especially to the vicinity of a church at no great distance. Indeed, certain of the most authentic historians of those parts, who have been careful in collecting and collating the floating facts concerning this spectre, allege, that the body of the trooper having been buried in the church yard, the ghost rides forth to the scene of battle in nightly quest of his head, © and that the rushing speed with which he sometimes passes along the hollow, like a midnight blast, is owing to his being belated, and in a hurry to get back to the church yard before day break.
Such is the general purport of this legendary superstition, which has furnished materials for many a wild story in that region of shadows; and the spectre is known, at all the country firesides, by the name of The Headless Horseman of Sleepy Hollow. ©
O A
Hessian trooper is a German mercenary soldier from the American Revolution. How and when is the horseman said to have died?
© Why does the horseman ride forth each night?
© What is happening "at all the country firesides"? What does this suggest about how early Americans entertained themselves?
Connecting Literature to History
1.	Drawing Inferences The writing of the period reflects a new national culture and identity. What do these passages suggest about the thoughts, feelings, or lives of early Americans?
2.	Making Predictions The Last of the Mohicans takes place during the French and Indian War. Whose side do you think Natty Bumppo
would most likely take—that of the French and Indians, that of the English, or neither? Explain.
3. Drawing Conclusions Both of these stories were very popular in their time. Why do you think these stories were so popular? What is it about the stories that makes them entertaining?
313
Social Studies Skills
Analysis
I
Critical Thinking
Civic
Participation
Study
Identifying Central Issues
Define the Skill
The reasons for historical events are often complex and difficult to determine. An accurate understanding of them requires the ability to identify the central issues involved. A central issue is the main topic of concern in a discussion or dispute. In history, these issues are usually matters of public debate or concern. They generally involve political, social, moral, economic, or territorial matters.
Being able to identify central issues lets you go beyond what the participants in an event said and gain a more accurate understanding of it. The skill is also useful for understanding issues today, and for evaluating the statements of those involved.
Learn the Skill
In this chapter you learned about the dispute that arose over Missouri's admission to the Union. Yet that was not what this controversy was really about. Recognizing the central issue in this dispute helps you understand why each side fought so hard over just one state.
Use the following steps to identify central issues when you read about historical events.
1.	Identify the main subject of the information.
2.	Determine the nature and purpose of what you are reading. Is it a primary source or a secondary one? Why has the information been provided?
3.	Find the strongest or most forceful phrases or statements in the material. These are often clues to the issues or ideas the speaker or writer thinks most central or important.
4.	Determine how the information might be connected to the major events or controversies that were concerning the nation at the time.
[ Practice the Skill
Soon after the Missouri Compromise passed, Secretary of State John Quincy Adams wrote:
^The impression produced upon my mind by the progress of this discussion [the dispute over Missouri] is that the bargain between freedom and slavery contained in the Constitution... is morally and politically vicious,... cruel and oppressive.... I have favored this Missouri Compromise, believing it to be all that can be effected [accomplished] under the present Constitution, and from an extreme unwillingness to put the Union at hazard [risk]. But perhaps it would have been a... bolder course to have persisted in the restriction upon Missouri till it should have terminated [ended] in a convention of the states to... amend the Constitution. This would have produced a new Union of thirteen or fourteen states unpolluted with slavery... If the Union must be dissolved, slavery is precisely the question upon which it ought to break. For the present, however, this contest [issue] is laid to sleep/^
Apply the steps to identifying central issues to analyze Adams's statement and answer the following questions:
1.	About what subject was Adams writing? What was his reason for making these remarks?
2.	What did Adams believe was the most important issue in the dispute? What strong language does he use to indicate this?
3.	What evidence suggests Adams did not think the breakup of the Union the central issue?
14 CHAPTER 9
Chapter Review
Reviewing Vocabulary, Terms, and People
Match the word in the left column with the correct definition in the right column.
1.	American System
2.	George Caleb Bingham
3.	Simon Bolivar
4.	Henry Clay
5.	Erie Canal
6.	Hudson River school
7.	James Monroe
8.	Monroe Doctrine
9.	nationalism
10. Rush-Bagot Agreement
a.	an agreement that limited naval power on the Great Lakes for both the United States and British Canada
b.	American artist known for his focus on the American landscape and people
c.	sense of pride and devotion to a nation
d.	a group of American artists in the mid-1800s who focused on the American landscape
e.	a leader of independence movements in Latin America, known as the Liberator
f.	the plan to raise tariffs in order to finance internal improvements such as roads and canals
g.	president who promoted the acquisition of Florida, closer ties to Latin America, and presided during the Era of Good Feelings
h.	project that connected the Hudson River to Lake Erie and improved trade and transportation
i.	representative from Kentucky who promoted improvements in transportation and the Missouri Compromise
j.	U.S. declaration that any attempt by a foreign nation to establish colonies in the Americas would be viewed as a hostile act
A NEW NATIONAL IDENTITY 315
Comprehension and
Critical Thinking
SECTION 1 (Pages 298-301)
11.	a. Identify Identify Monroe's foreign policy. What were the four main points of the Monroe Doctrine? What was its impact?
b.	Draw Conclusions How did the United States compromise in its disputes with British Canada?
c.	Evaluate Which of the issues that the United States faced with foreign nations do you think was most important to maintaining national security? Why?
SECTION 2 (Pages 302-305)
12.	a. Recall What developments helped strengthen national unity in this period?
b.	Describe What were some of the environmental consequences of canal and road building? Were these positive or negative?
c.	Summarize What arguments did supporters and opponents of the American System use for their opinion of protective tariffs, taxation, and the national bank? How did these arguments reflect sectionalism?
d.	Analyze How was the disagreement over Missouri's statehood an example of sectionalism? How was the disagreement resolved?
e.	Predict What effect might the election of 1824 have on national unity? Why?
SECTION 3 (Pages 308-311)
13.	a. Identify Who was John James Audubon and how did he contribute to the development of American arts?
b.	Describe How did popular music show the interests of Americans in the early 1800s?
c.	Make Inferences Why do you think new American styles of art and literature emerged? How did they reflect both continuity and change within American culture?
d.	Elaborate Which element of American culture of the early 1800s do you find most appealing? Why?
15.	Society and Culture What led to the creation of a uniquely American culture?
16.	Society and Culture When was the era of sectionalism? What were the causes and effects of sectionalism?
17.	Society and Culture Using absolute and relative chronologies, make a time line and write a summary of time periods in this chapter.
Using the Internet
18.	Activity: Researching Through your online textbook, research the development of American cultural identity. Then create a visual display of your findings.
/I hmhsocialstudies.coml
Reading Skills fijjLr
Comparing and Contrasting Use the Reading Skills taught in this chapter to answer the question below.
19.	Write a report that compares and contrasts the physical geography, economy, and political goals of the three regions of the United States.
Social Studies Skills
Identifying Central Issues Use the Social Studies Skills taught in this chapter to answer the question below.
i [Democratic-Republicans] pushed forward
a plan eventually known as the American j System—a series of measures intended to make ? the United States economically self-sufficient.
... To build the economy, Clay pushed for a
i national bank that would provide a single cur-l rency, making interstate trade easier.... Clay J
wanted the money from a protective tariff to be j used to improve roads and canals, (p. 302)
teiiiriJMWiwrmniiiMiwinrrr^
20.	What is the central issue addressed by the American System?
"’vWriteSmart
Reviewing Themes
14.	Politics Identify the foreign policies of presidents Washington through Monroe. How did the relations of the United States with foreign nations lead to a rise in nationalism?
CHAPTER 9
21. Writing a Character Sketch Write a paragraph describing your overall impression of the nation's character. Write about its relationships with others, its feelings about itself, and its values.
CHAPTER
Texas Test Practice
DIRECTIONS:
Read each question and write the letter of the best response. 1	Use the map below to answer the following question.
The present-day state that became part of the United States in the Adams-Oms Treaty of 1819 is shown on the map by the letter A W.
B X.
C Y.
D Z.
2	The principle that European nations could establish no more colonies in North and South America was set forth in the
F
Missouri Compromise. G
Rush-Bagot Agreement. H
Monroe Doctrine. J
Convention of 1818. 3	The Missouri Compromise had a significant effect on the United States because it
A established the present border with Canada.
B prohibited slavery north of Missouri’s southern
border.
C led to the expansion of roads and canals.
D settled conflicts between Native Americans in the West and the federal government.
4	Greek- and Roman-style architecture became common in the United States in the early 1800s because of
F the popularity of President George Washington, who liked the building style.
G
Americans’ admiration for the ideals of Greek democracy and republicanism. H the nation’s desire to build as strong a military as the Greeks and Romans had.
J
Americans’ great feeling of nationalism after the War of 1812. 5	Which painting would have been typical of an artist of the Hudson River school in the 1830s and 1840s?
A a portrait of a famous American B a Native American hunting game C a portrait of an ancient Greek or Roman
lawmaker
D a scene showing America’s natural beauty
6	Examine the following passage from a letter about American education and then use it to answer the question below.
Z/A lady asked me one day, ‘What state is Virginia in?’ Another asked, ‘Is Canada in Kentucky?’ Another supposed that ‘Joe Graphy [geography] was very hard to learn.’ Such is the cause of all our mistakes in religion, morals, and politics. When we are educated we can cast off prejudice and superstition. Education improves our judgments and restrains our passions. In short, it enables us to discover what is best for our welfare.”
— Anne Newport Royall, adapted from Letters from Alabama, 1817-1822
Document-Based Question Why might Royall and others try to make education available to more Americans? Explain.
A NEW NATIONAL IDENTITY 317
CHAPTER I
■ ■ 1828-1840 

Essential Question
What impact did Andrew Jackson's presidency have on the nation?
mvNotebook
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS)
A, 5A, 5B, 5C, 5F, 5G, 7A, 7D, 10A, 10B, 12A, 12 D, 17B, 18B, 22B, 23C, 29B, 31A
SECTION 1: Jacksonian Democracy.........................322
The Big Idea The expansion of voting rights and the election of Andrew Jackson signaled the growing power of the American people.
SECTION 2: Jackson's Administration.....................326
The Big Idea Andrew Jackson's presidency was marked by political conflicts.
SECTION 3: Indian Removal...............................332
The Big Idea President Jackson supported a policy of Indian removal.
<This statue of Andrew Jackson has-v stood in Washington, D.C., for more ‘than 150 years and captures the drive andspirit of the seventh president of the UffSted State#.«.
socus on Writing
myWriteSmart
United
States

An Interview You are a reporter for a large city newspaper in the year 1837. Andrew Jackson has just left office, and you have been given the assignment of interviewing him about his presidency and his role in American politics. As you read this chapter, you will write interview questions for your interview with Jackson. You will then pair with another student and interview each other, giving answers as Jackson when you are being interviewed.
1828
Andrew Jackson is elected president.
Sequoya finishes a written language for the Cherokee.
World
1829
Louis Braille publishes a reading system for the blind.
'8 CHAPTER 10
r>
Jackson's Personality HISTORY and Legacy
7\ hmhsocialstudies.com
VIDEO
1838
The Trail of Tears begins when U.S. troops remove the Cherokee from Georgia.

1832
Andrew Jackson vetoes the charter renewal of the national Bank of the United States.
1836
Martin Van Buren is elected president.
1833
Slavery is abolished in the British Empire.
1838
Dutch colonists known as Boers clash with the Zulu in southern Africa.
1839
The Opium War breaks out between Great Britain and China.
A
British reform bill doubles
the number of British
men who can vote.
THE AGE OF JACKSON 319
Reading Social Studies
1
Economics
Geography
Politics
Society and Culture
Science and Technology
FOCUS on Themes In this chapter you will read about the events that shaped the United States from 1828 to 1838. You will see how political and economic decisions were intertwined. For instance, you will read about the tensions between southern
and northern states over tariff regulations. You will also read about the forced relocation of many Native Americans to the West. Understanding how economic issues led to political decisions will help you understand this time.
Drawing Conclusions about the Past
Focus on Reading Writers don't always tell you everything you need to know about a subject. Sometimes you need to think critically about what they have said and make your own decisions about what you've read.
Drawing Conclusions Earlier in this book, you learned how to make inferences. Sometimes when you read, you will need to make several inferences and put them together. The result is a conclusion, an informed judgment that you make by combining information.
The 1828 campaign focused a great deal on the candidates' personalities. Jackson's campaigners described him as a war hero who had been born poor and rose to success through his own
hard work.
Adams was a Harvard graduate whose father
had been the second U.S. president. Jackson's supporters described Adams as being out of touch with everyday people . . . When the ballots were counted, Jackson had defeated Adams, winning a record number of popular
votes. Ipp. 323-324)

Inference: Jackson shared many qualities with American voters.
Inference: Adams enjoyed many privileges that most Americans did not.
Inference: Jackson easily won the election by a huge majority.
!
Conclusion: In 1828, Americans chose a president to whom they could relate.
0 CHAPTER 10
You Try It!
The following passage is from the chapter you are getting ready to read. As you read the passage, look for the facts of the situation.
The Election of 1834
In 1834 a new political party had formed to From oppose Jackson. Its members called them- ph^er 1°' selves Whigs, after an English political party that opposed the monarchy, to make the point that Jackson was using his power like a king. The Whig Party favored the idea of a weak president and a strong Congress.
Unable to agree on a candidate, the Whigs chose four men to run against Van Buren.
Because of this indecision, and with strong backing from Jackson, Van Buren won the election.
HMH*/
After you read the passage, answer the following questions.
1. From this passage, what can you infer about President Jackson's popularity with the Whig Party?
2.	The Whigs could not choose a single presidential candidate, so they nominated four men. Based on what you know about elections from your studies and your past experiences, how do you think this affected the votes each man received?
3.	Jackson's backing helped Van Buren win the presidency. From this, what can you infer about Jackson's popularity with the American people as a whole?
4. Using the inferences you made answering questions 1 through 3, draw a conclusion about why Van Buren won the election of 1834.

As you read Chapter 10, use your personal background knowledge and experience to draw conclusions about what you are reading.
Chapter 10
Section 1
nominating conventions (p. 323) Jacksonian Democracy (p. 323) Democratic Party fp. 323)
John C. Calhoun (p. 323) spoils system (p. 324)
Martin Van Buren (p. 324) Kitchen Cabinet (p. 324) Section 2
Tariff of Abominations (p. 327) states' rights doctrine Ip. 328) nullification crisis Ip. 328)
Daniel Webster (p. 328) McCulloch v. Maryland Ip. 330) Whig Party Ip. 330)
Panic of 1837 Ip. 331)
William Henry Harrison (p. 331) Section 3
Indian Removal Act (p. 332) Indian Territory (p. 332)
Bureau of Indian Affairs Ip. 332) Sequoya Ip. 333)
Worcester v. Georgia (p. 334) Trail of Tears (p. 334)
Black Hawk (p. 335)
Osceola Ip. 335)
Academic Vocabulary
Success in school is related to knowing academic vocabulary— the words that are frequently used in school assignments and discussions. In this chapter, you will learn the following academic words:
criteria (p. 328)
contemporary (p. 333)
THE AGE OF JACKSON 321
TEKS 1A,5C,5F


What You Will Learn..
1.	Democracy expanded in the 1820s as more Americans held the right to vote.
2.	Jackson's victory in the election of 1828 marked a change in American politics.
T
The expansion of voting rights and the election of Andrew Jackson signaled the growing power of the American people.
Key Terms and People
nominating conventions, p. 323 Jacksonian Democracy, p. 323 Democratic Party, p. 323 John C. Calhoun, p.323 spoils system, p. 324 Martin Van Buren, p. 324 Kitchen Cabinet, p. 324
”^jr hmhsocialstudies.com

I TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on how an expansion of voting rights led to Andrew Jackson's election to the presidency.
22 CHAPTER 10
Jacksonian
Democracy
If YOU were there...
It's 1829, and you live in Washington, D.C. You've come with a friend to the party for Andrew Jackson's inauguration as president. Your friend admires Jackson as a man ofthe people. You are less sure about his ability. Jackson's inauguration soon turns into a rowdy party, as mobs crowd into the White House. They break glasses and overturn the furniture.
How would you feel about having Jackson as your president?
I BUILDING BACKGROUND
In the early years of the United States, I the right to vote belonged mainly to a few—free white men who owned
property. As the country grew, more men were given the right to vote.
This expansion of democracy led to the election of Andrew Jackson, a war hero. But not everyone approved of Jackson.	j
Expansion of Democracy
America in the early 1800s was changing fast. In the North, workshops run by the craftspeople who owned them were being replaced by large-scale factories owned by businesspeople and staffed by hired workers. In the South, small family farms began to give way to large cotton plantations, owned by wealthy white people and worked by enslaved African Americans. Wealth seemed to be concentrating into fewer hands. Many ordinary Americans felt left behind.
These same people also began to believe they were losing power in their government. In the late 1700s some Americans thought that government was best managed by wealthy, property-owning men. Government policies seemed targeted to help build the power of these people. The result was a growing belief that the wealthy were tightening their grip on power in the United States.
Hoping for change, small farmers, frontier settlers, and slaveholders rallied behind reform-minded Andrew Jackson, the popular hero of the War of 1812 and presidential candidate in the 1824 election. They believed Jackson would defend the rights of the common

Linking to today
Democracy in Action
Democracy spread in the early 1800s as more people became active in politics. Many of these people lived in the new western states. In these mostly rural areas, a political rally could be as simple as neighboring farmers meeting to talk about the issues of the day, as the farmers in the painting on the right are doing.
During the early 1800s democracy and demonstrations blossomed in the United States. The demonstrators of today owe much to the Americans of Andrew Jackson's time. Today, political rallies are a familiar sight in communities all over the country.

people and the slave states. And they had been bitterly disappointed in the way Jack-son had lost the 1824 election because of the decision in the House of Representatives.
During the Age of Jackson, many democratic reforms were made. Some states changed their qualifications for voters to grant more white males suffrage. The revised rules, however, usually excluded free blacks from voting as they had been allowed under original state constitutions. Political parties began holding public nominating conventions, where party members choose the party's candidates instead of the party leaders. This period of expanding democracy in the 1820s and 1830s later became known as Jacksonian Democracy.
Finding Main Ideas
How did voting rights change in the early 1800s?
Reading check .
Election of 1828
Jackson supporters were determined that their candidate would win the 1828 election. They formed the Democratic Party to support Jackson's candidacy. Many people who backed President Adams began calling themselves National Republicans.
The 1828 presidential contest was a rematch of the 1824 election. Once again, John Quincy Adams faced Andrew Jackson. Jackson chose John C. Calhoun as his vice presidential running mate.
The Campaign
The 1828 campaign focused a great deal on the candidates' personalities. Jackson's campaigners described him as a war hero who had been born poor and rose to success through his own hard work.
THE IMPACT
TODAY
Just as they did in the 1820s, presidential campaigns today frequently focus on personal image—strong versus weak or government-insider versus newcomer, for example.
THE AGE OF JACKSON 323
Primary Source
LETTER
People's President
Washington resident Margaret Bayard Smith was surprised by the chaos surrounding Jackson's inauguration.
**What a scene did we witness!... a rabble, a mob, of boys,
... women, children, scrambling, fighting, romping ... Cut glass and china to the amount of several thousand dollars had been broken ... But it was the people's day, and the people's President, and the people would rule/*
—Margaret Bayard Smith, quoted in Eyewitness to America, edited by David Colbert
ANALYSIS
SKILL
ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
How does the author view the people that support Jackson?
Adams was a Harvard graduate whose father had been the second U.S. president. Jackson's supporters described Adams as being out of touch with everyday people. Even a fan of Adams agreed that he was "as cold as a lump of ice." In turn, Adams's supporters said Jackson was hot tempered, crude, and ill-equipped to be president of the United States. When the ballots were counted, Jack-son had defeated Adams, winning a record number of popular votes.
Jackson's Inauguration
Jackson's supporters saw his victory as a win for the common people. A crowd cheered outside the Capitol as he took his oath of office, then followed Jackson to a party on the White House lawn. The few police officers on hand had difficulty controlling the partygoers.
As president, Jackson rewarded some of his supporters with government jobs. This spoils system — the practice of giving government jobs to political backers—comes from the saying "to the victor belong the spoils [valued goods] of the enemy."
Secretary of State Martin Van Buren was one of Jackson's strongest allies in his official cabinet. President Jackson also relied a great deal on his Kitchen Cabinet, an informal group of trusted advisers who sometimes met in the White House kitchen.
READING CHECK
Analyzing Howmightthe spoils system cause disputes?
■Summary and Preview The expansion I of democracy swept Andrew Jackson into office. In the next section you will read about the increasing regional tensions that
occurred during Jackson's presidency.
Section 1 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com

Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Recall What changes did states make that allowed more people to vote?
b.	Explain Why did the Democratic Party emerge?
c.	Draw Conclusions How did nominating conventions allow the people more say in politics?
d.	Define When was the Age of Jackson? What caused it?
e.	Predict How might changes to the voting process brought about by Jacksonian Democracy affect politics in the future?
2.	a. Recall What two new political parties faced off in the election of 1828? Which candidate did each party support?
b. Make Inferences Why did Andrew Jackson
have more popular support than did Adams?
c. Evaluate Do you think the spoils system was an acceptable practice? Explain your answer.
Critical Thinking
3. Identifying Effect Review your notes on the election of Andrew Jackson to the presidency. Then use a cause-and-effect chart like this one to show the ways in which Jacksonian Democracy increased Americans'political power.
Jacksonian	I	increased Americans' \	
Democracy j	political power	/	

^WriteSmart
4. Noting Significance Review this section, and note things that made Jackson's political campaign and election significant in the history of American politics.
14 CHAPTER 10
Biography
Andrew Jackson
If you were president, how would you use your powers?
When did he live? 1767-1845
Where did he live? Jackson was born in Waxhaw, a region along the border of the North and South Carolina colonies. In 1788 he moved to Nashville, Tennessee, which was still a part of North Carolina. There he built a mansion called the Hermitage. He lived in Washington as president, then retired to the Hermitage, where he died.
KEY EVENTS
4ft 1796-1797
Served in U.S. House of Representatives
4ft 1797-1798
Served as U.S. senator
41 1798-1804
Served on Tennessee Supreme Court
4ft1815
Defeated British at Battle of New Orleans
What did he do? Jackson had no formal education, but he taught himself law and became a successful lawyer. He became Tennessee's first representative to the U.S. Congress and also served in the Senate. Jackson became a national hero when his forces defeated the Creek and Seminole Indians. He went on to battle the British in the Battle of New Orleans during the War of 1812. Jackson was elected as the nation's seventh president in 1828 and served until 1837.
why is he SO important? Jackson's belief in a strong presidency made him both loved and hated. He vetoed as many bills as the six previous presidents together. Jackson also
believed in a strong Union. When South Carolina tried to nullify, or reject, a federal tariff, he threatened to send troops into the state to force it to obey.
Identifying Cause and Effect Why did Jackson gain loyal friends and fierce enemies?
$ 1821
Governor of Florida Territory
$ 1823-1825
Served as U.S. senator
$ 1829-1837
Served as president of the United States
4 1830
Signed Indian Removal Act
1832
Vetoed rechartering the Second Bank of the United States. Threatened to send troops to South Carolina when it tried to nullify ' federal tarif
SECTION
2
	B v-..	TEKS 5A,5B,7A,7D, 12A, 12D, 17B, 22B
What You Will Learn...	Y		
Main Ideas
Regional differences grew during Jackson's presidency.
2.	The rights of the states were debated amid arguments about a national tariff.
3.	Jackson's attack on the Bank sparked controversy.
4.	Jackson's policies led to the Panic of 1837.
r
1


V
Jackson's jAjd nni i fli i st ri cb mi
If YOU were there...
You live on a small farm in South Carolina in 1829. Your family grows corn and cotton to sell, as well as vegetables for your own table. Although you grow your own food, you also depend on imported wool, flax, iron, and hemp to make ropes. But the government has just put new taxes on these products from Europe. Now they're too expensive for you to buy!
How would you feel about the new taxes on imports?
Andrew Jackson's presidency was marked by political conflicts.
Key Terms and People
Tariff of Abominations, p. 327 states' rights doctrine, p. 328 nullification crisis, p. 328 Daniel Webster, p. 328 McCulloch v. Maryland, p. 330 Whig Party, p. 330 Panic of 1837, p. 331 William Henry Harrison, p. 331
BUILDING BACKGROUND
Even though Americans had a new feeling of national unity, different sections of the country still had very different interests. The industrial North competed with the agricultural < South and the western frontier. As Congress favored one section over another, political differences grew. hmhsocialstudies.com
J TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the conflicts that Andrew Jackson faced during his administration.
Sectional Differences Increase
Regional differences had a major effect on Andrew Jackson's presidency. Americans' views of Jackson's policies were based on where they lived and the economy of those regions.
Three Regions Emerge
There were three main U.S. regions in the early 1800s. The North, first of all, had an economy based on trade and on manufacturing. Northerners supported tariffs because tariffs helped them compete with British factories. Northerners also opposed the federal government's sale of public land at cheap prices. Cheap land encouraged potential laborers to move from northern factory towns to the West.
The second region was the South. Its economy was based on farming. Southern farmers raised all types of crops, but the most popular were the cash crops of cotton and tobacco. Southerners sold a large portion of their crops to foreign nations.
26 CHAPTER 10

Regions of the United States, Early 1800s

Southerners imported their manufactured goods. Tariffs made imported goods more expensive for southern farmers. In addition, high tariffs angered some of the South's European trading partners. These trading partners would likely raise their own tariffs in retaliation. To avoid this situation, southerners called for low tariffs.
Southerners also relied on enslaved African Americans to work the plantations. The issue of slavery would become increasingly controversial between the North and South.
In the third region, the West, the frontier economy was just emerging. Settlers favored policies that boosted their farming economy and encouraged further settlement. Western farmers grew a wide variety of crops. Their biggest priority was cheap land and internal improvements such as better roads and water transportation.
Tariff of Abominations
Tariffs became one of the first issues that President Jackson faced. In 1827, the year before Jackson's election, northern manufacturers began to demand a tariff on imported woolen goods. Northerners wanted the tariff
to protect their industries from foreign competition, especially from Great Britain.
British companies were driving American ones out of business with their inexpensive manufactured goods. The tariff northerners supported, however, was so high that importing wool would be impossible. Southerners opposed the tariff, sayng it would hurt their economy.
Before Andrew Jackson took office, Congress placed a high tariff on imports. Angry southerners called it the Tariff of Abominations. (An abomination is a hateful thing.) Southern voters were outraged.
President John Quincy Adams signed the tariff legislation, though he did not fully support it. In early U.S. history, presidents tended to reserve veto power for legislation that they believed violated the Constitution. Signing the tariff bill meant Adams would surely be defeated in his re-election bid. The new tariff added fuel to the growing sectional differences plaguing the young nation.
Summarizing Describe
the sectional economic differences in the United States during the early 1800s.
READING CHECK .
THE AGE OF JACKSON 327
Academic
Vocabulary
criteria
basic requirements
FOCUS ON
Reaping What conclusions can you draw about the importance of the states' rights debate after reading this section?
States' Rights Debate
When Andrew Jackson took office in 1829, he was forced to respond to the growing conflict over tariffs. At the core of the dispute was the question of an individual state's right to disregard a law that had been passed by the U.S. Congress.
Nullification Crisis
Early in his political career, Vice President John C. Calhoun had supported the criteria of a strong central government. But in 1828 when Congress passed the Tariff of Abominations, Calhoun joined his fellow southerners in protest. Economic depression and previous tariffs had severely damaged the economy of his home state, South Carolina. It was only beginning to recover in 1828. Some leaders in the state even spoke of leaving the Union over the issue of tariffs.
In response to the tariff, Calhoun drafted the South Carolina Exposition and Protest. It said that Congress should not favor one state or region over another. Calhoun used the Protest to advance the states' rights doctrine, which said that since the states had formed the national government, state power should be greater than federal power. The doctrine challenged the idea of the supremacy and authority of a central government. Calhoun believed states had the right to nullify, or reject, any federal law they judged to be unconstitutional.
Calhoun's theory was controversial, and it drew some fierce challengers. Many of them were from the northern states that had benefited from increased tariffs. These opponents believed that the American people, not the individual states, made up the Union. Conflict between the supporters and the opponents of nullification deepened. The dispute became known as the nullification crisis. It became not only a crisis over the tariff but also a question about the ideas behind the Constitution as a system of government.
Although he chose not to put his name on his Exposition and Protest, Calhoun did resign from the vice presidency. He was then elected to the Senate, where he continued his arguments in favor of nullification. Martin Van Buren replaced Calhoun as vice president when Jackson was re-elected president.
The Hayne-Webster Debate
The debate about states' rights began early in our nation's history. Thomas Jefferson and James Madison supported the states' power to disagree with the federal government in the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions of 1798-99. Some of the delegates at the Hartford Convention supported states' rights. But Calhoun's theory went further. He believed that states could judge whether a law was or was not constitutional. This position put the power of the Supreme Court in question.
The issue of nullification was intensely debated on the floor of the Senate in 1830. Robert Y. Hayne, senator from South Carolina, defended states' rights. He argued that nullification gave states a way to lawfully protest federal legislation. Daniel Webster of Massachusetts argued that the United States was one nation, not a pact among independent states. He believed that the welfare of the nation should override that of individual states.
Jackson Responds
Although deeply opposed to nullification, Jackson was concerned about economic problems in the southern states. In 1832 he urged Congress to pass another tariff that lowered the previous rate. South Carolina thought the slight change was inadequate. The state legislature took a monumental step; it decided to test the doctrine of states' rights.
South Carolina's first action was to pass the Nullification Act, which declared the 1828 and 1832 tariffs "null, void ... [and not] binding upon this State, its officers or citizens." South Carolina threatened to withdraw
8 CHAPTER 10
from the Union if federal troops were used to collect duties. The legislature also voted to form its own army. Jackson was enraged.
The president sternly condemned nullification. Jackson declared that he would enforce the law in South Carolina. At his request, Congress passed the Force Bill, approving use of the army if necessary. In light of Jackson's determined position, no other state chose to support South Carolina.
Early in 1833, Henry Clay of Kentucky had proposed a compromise that would gradually lower the tariff over several years. As Jackson's intentions became clear, both the U.S. Congress and South Carolina moved quickly to approve the compromise. The Congress would decrease the tariff, and South Carolina's leaders would enforce the law.
Despite the compromise, neither side changed its beliefs about states' rights. The argument continued for years, resulting in the huge conflict known as the Civil War.
READING CHECK
Summarizing What led to the nullification crisis, and why was it important?
Jackson Attacks the Bank
President Jackson upheld federal authority in the nullification crisis. He did not, however, always support greater federal power. For example, he opposed the Second Bank of the United States, founded by Congress in 1816.
The Second Bank of the United States was given a 20-year charter. This charter gave it the power to act exclusively as the federal government's financial agent. The Bank held federal deposits, made transfers of federal funds between states, and dealt with any payments or receipts involving the federal government. It also issued bank notes, or paper currency. Some 80 percent of the Bank was privately owned, but its operations were supervised by Congress and the president. The bank had helped stabilize the financial troubles the nation's economy had experienced during the War of 1812.
Many states, particularly in the South, had opposed the Bank. Small farmers believed that the Bank only helped wealthy business-people. Jackson also questioned the legality
Primary Source
POINTS OF VIEW
States' Rights vs. the Union
The framers ofthe Constitution created a document that was remarkable in its scope. But a few issues were unresolved. One of the most controversial was the matter of states'rights versus the authority ofthe federal
government. Daniel Webster insisted that the interests ofthe Union should prevail. John C. Calhoun believed that the powers ofthe states were greater.
"While the Union lasts we have high, exciting, gratifying [rewarding] prospects spread out before us, for us and our children. God grant that in my day... my eyes shall be turned to behold the
gorgeous ensign [flag] ofthe republic... bearing for its motto ... Liberty and Union, now and forever one and inseparable."
—Daniel Webster
from the Hayne-Webster debate, 1830
»If there be no protective power in the reserved rights ofthe states, they must in the end be forced to rebel ...»
C.
Calhoun from a letter to Virgil Maxey, September 11,1830
Finding Main Ideas How did the views of Calhoun and Webster differ?
THE AGE OF JACKSON 329
Primary Source
POLITICAL CARTOON
Jackson against
the Bank
Andrew Jackson's fight with the Bank was the subject of many political cartoons, like this one.
In this scene, Jackson is shown fighting a hydra that represents the national bank. The hydra is a mythological monster whose heads grow back when cut off. The heads of the hydra are portraits of politicians who opposed Jackson's policies.
Nicholas Biddle is at the center of the hydra. Why?
Andrew Jackson fights the hydra with a cane labeled "veto."
Why do you think the cartoonist chose this monster to represent the Bank?
ANALYSIS
SKILLI
Analyzing Primary Sources How does this image show the difficulty Jackson had politically?
HISTORY
VIDEO
Jackson Censured in Bank War
71 hmhsocitilstudios.com ;
of the Bank. He believed it was an unconstitutional extension of the power of Congress. The states, he thought, should have the power to control the banking system.
Some states decided to take action. Maryland tried to pass a tax that would limit the Bank's operations. James McCulloch, cashier of the Bank's branch in Maryland, refused to pay this tax. The state took him to court, and the resulting case went all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court. In McCulloch v. Maryland, the Court ruled that the national bank was constitutional.
Nicholas Biddle, the Bank's director, decided to push for a bill to renew the Bank's charter in 1832. Jackson campaigned for the bill's defeat. "I will kill it," he promised. True to his word, Jackson vetoed the legislation when Congress sent it to him.
Congress could not get the two-thirds majority needed to override Jackson's veto. Jackson also weakened the Bank's power by moving most of its funds to state banks. In many cases, these banks used the funds to offer easy credit terms to people buying land. While this practice helped expansion in the West, it also led to inflation.
In the summer of 1836 Jackson tried to slow this inflation. He ordered Americans to use only gold or silver—instead of paper state-bank notes—to buy government-owned land. This policy did not help the national economy as Jackson had hoped. Jackson did improve the economy by lowering the national debt. However, his policies opened the door for approaching economic troubles.
Reading check ,
Analyzing Why did critics of the Second Bank of the United States oppose it?
Panic of 1837
Jackson was still very popular with voters in 1836. He chose not to run in 1836, however, and the Democrats nominated Vice President Martin Van Buren.
In 1834 a new political party had formed to oppose Jackson. Its members called themselves Whigs, after an English political party that opposed the monarchy, to make the point that Jackson was using his power like a king. The Whig Party favored the idea of a weak president and a strong Congress. Unable to agree on a candidate, the Whigs chose four
330 CHAPTER 10
The Supreme Court and Capitalism
connect to Economics
1810
1819
1824
During the early 1800s, the Supreme Court made several rulings that helped define federal power over contracts and commerce. These rulings reinforced capitalism as the ruling economic system in the United States.
Mfltof effect did the Supreme Court hove on economic development?
Fletcherv. Peck
State legislatures could not pass laws violating existing contracts.
Dartmouth College v. Woodward
State legislatures could not pass laws to change the charters of institutions or businesses.
McCulloch v. Maryland
States do not have the power to tax federal institutions.
Gibbons v. Ogden
Only the federal government has the power to regulate interstate and foreign commerce.
men to run against Van Buren. Because of this indecision, and with backing from Jackson, Van Buren won the election.
Shortly after Van Buren took office, the country experienced the Panic of 1837, a severe economic depression. Jackson's banking policies and his unsuccessful plan to curb inflation contributed to the panic. But people blamed Van Buren.
In 1840 the Whigs united against the weakened Van Buren to stand behind one candidate, William Henry Harrison, an army general. Harrison won in an electoral land-
slide. The Whigs had achieved their goal of winning the presidency.
Identifying Cause and Effect
What contributed to the Panic of 1837, and how did it affect the 1840 election?
READING CHECK ,
IF
Summary and preview The states' I rights debate dominated much of Jack-
son's presidency. In the next section you will leam about the removal of American Indians from the southeastern United States.
Section 2 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
rT_—j ? I J
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Recall On what were the economies of the northern, southern, and western states based?
Why did they differ?
b.	Summarize What disagreements arose over protective tariffs?
c.	Predict How might the sectional issues involved in the dispute over the Tariff of Abominations lead to future problems between North and South?
2.	a. Describe What roles did Henry Clay, Daniel Webster, and John C. Calhoun play in the nullification crisis?
b.	Summarize What idea did supporters of the states' rights doctrine promote?
c.	Explain What constitutional issues were raised by the nullification crisis and states'rights debate?
3.	a. Describe What problems resulted from weakening the Bank?
b. Draw Conclusions Why did Jackson veto the bill to renew the Second Bank of the United States?
4.	a. Recall What caused the Panic of 1837?
b. Summarize How did the Whig Party win the election of 1840?
c. Elaborate Why do you think Jackson chose not to run for the presidency in 1836? Do you think he made the right decision? Why?
Critical Thinking
5.	Identifying Cause and Effect Review your notes on the political conflicts during Jackson's administration. Then use a graphic organizer like the one below to show how some of Jackson's policies dealing with conflicts led to the Panic of 1837.
Jackson's
Policies
Panic of 1837
",yWriteSmart
6.	Identifying Important Conflicts Stories about conflict sell newspapers. Make a list of important conflicts that occurred during Jackson's presidency and note the role Jackson played in creating or resolving the conflicts.
THE AGE OF JACKSON
TEKS 5G,10A,10B,18B,22B,23(
Ivtdidfi R^omo*v2il
What You Will Learn...
1.	The Indian Removal Act authorized the relocation of Native Americans to the West.
2.	Cherokee resistance to removal led to disagreement between Jackson and the Supreme Court.
3.	Other Native Americans resisted removal with force.
If YOU were there...
You belong to the Cherokee nation. Your family has farmed rich lands in Georgia for as long as anyone can remember. You've learned some new ways from white settlers, too. At school you've learned to read both English and Cherokee. But now that doesn't seem important. The U.S. government is sending you and your people far away to unknown places in the West.
How would you feel about being taken away from your home?
V
President Jackson supported a policy of Indian removal.
Key Terms and People
Indian Removal Act, p. 332 Indian Territory, p. 332 Bureau of Indian Affairs, p. 332 Sequoya, p. 333 Worcester v. Georgia, p. 334 Trail of Tears, p. 334 Black Hawk, p. 335 Osceola, p. 335
hmhsocialstudies.com
W TAKING NOTES 1
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the steps Andrew Jackson and the U.S. government took toward Indian removal.
I BUILDING BACKGROUND
President Andrew Jackson had become I famous as an American Indian fighter. He had no sympathy with Native Americans' claim to the lands where they had always lived. With public support, he reversed the government's pledge to respect Indian land claims. The result was the brutal removal ofthe southeastern peoples to empty lands in the West
Indian Removal Act
Native Americans had long lived in settlements stretching from Georgia to Mississippi. However, President Jackson and other political leaders wanted to open this land to settlement by American farmers. Under pressure from Jackson, Congress passed the Indian Removal Act in 1830, authorizing the removal of Native Americans who lived east of the Mississippi River to lands in the West.
Congress then established Indian Territory—U.S. land in what is now Oklahoma—and planned to move Native Americans there. Some supporters of this plan, like John C. Calhoun, argued that removal to Indian Territory would protect Indians from further conflicts with American settlers. "One of the greatest evils to which they are subject is that incessant [constant] pressure of our population," he noted. "To guard against this evil. . . there ought to be the strongest... assurance that the country given [to] them should be theirs." To manage Indian removal to western lands, Congress approved the creation of a new government agency, the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
332 CHAPTER 10
During the Trail of Tears, thousands of Cherokee died from disease, starvation, and harsh weather. They were forced to walk hundreds of miles to their new land in the West. Other Native Americans were also moved, with similar results.
What can you see in this painting that indicates this was a difficult journey?
HISTORY
The Choctaw were the first Indians sent to Indian Territory. The Mississippi legislature abolished the Choctaw government and then forced the Choctaw leaders to sign the Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek. This treaty gave more than 7.5 million acres of their land to the state. The Choctaw moved to Indian Territory during a disastrous winter trip. Federal officials in charge of the move did not provide enough food or supplies to the Choctaw, most of whom were on foot. About one-fourth of the Choctaw died of cold, disease, or starvation.
News of the Choctaw's hardships caused other Indians to resist removal. When the Creek resisted in 1836, federal troops moved in and captured some 14,500 of them. They led the Creek, many in chains, to Indian Territory. One Creek woman remembered the trip being filled with "the awful silence that showed the heartaches and sorrow at being taken from the homes and even separation from loved ones." The Chickasaw, who lived in upper Mississippi, negotiated a treaty for better supplies on their trip to Indian Territory. Nevertheless, many Chickasaw lives were also lost during removal.
REAPINGCHECK J
Finding Main Ideas What
major changes did President Jackson make to U.S.
VIDEO
Jackson:
Cherokees, Tariffs and Nullification
policy regarding Native Americans?
hmhsocialstudies.com
Cherokee Resistance
Many Cherokee had believed that they could
prevent conflicts and avoid removal by /Academic
adopting the contemporary culture of white VOCABULARY
people. In the early 1800s they invited mis- contemporary
sionaries to set up schools where Cherokee ex'st'n9 at the r	same time
children learned how to read and write in
English. The Cherokee developed their own
government modeled after the U.S. Consti-
tution with an election system, a bicameral
council, and a court system. All of these were
headed by a principal chief.
A
Cherokee named Sequoya used 86 characters to represent Cherokee syllables to create a writing system for their own complex language. In 1828 the Cherokee began publishing a newspaper printed in both English and Cherokee. The adoption of white culture did not protect the Cherokee. After gold was discovered on their land in Georgia, their treaty rights
THE AGE OF JACKSON 332
THE IMPACT
TODAY
Members of the
Cherokee Nation of northeastern Oklahoma are descendants of the Cherokee who were removed to Indian Territory. The group's population is almost 300,000 and is the largest tribal nation in the United States. Members of the Eastern Band of
Cherokee Indians are descendants of the Cherokee who escaped removal. The
12,500 members of this group live mostly in western North Carolina.
were ignored. Georgia leaders began preparing for the Cherokee's removal. When they refused to move, the Georgia militia began attacking Cherokee towns. In response, the Cherokee sued the state. They said that they were an independent nation and claimed that the government of Georgia had no legal power over their lands.
In 1832 the Supreme Court, under the leadership of Chief Justice John Marshall, agreed. In Worcester v. Georgia the Court ruled that the Cherokee nation was a distinct community in which the laws of Georgia had no force. The Court also stated that only the federal government, not the states, had authority over Native Americans.
Georgia, however, ignored the Court's ruling, and President Jackson took no action to make Georgia follow the ruling. "John Marshall has made his decision; now let him enforce it," Jackson supposedly said. By not
enforcing the Court's decision, Jackson violated his presidential oath to uphold the laws of the land. However, most members of Congress and American citizens did not protest the ways Jackson removed Native Americans.
In the spring of 1838, U.S. troops began to remove all Cherokee to Indian Territory. A few were able to escape and hide in the mountains of North Carolina. After the Cherokee were removed, Georgia took their .businesses, farms, and property.
The Cherokee's 800-mile forced march became known as the Trail of Tears. During the march, the Cherokee suffered from disease, hunger, and harsh weather. Almost one-fourth of the 18,000 Cherokee died on the march.
Finding Main ideas
What was the Worcesterv. Georgia ruling, and what was Jackson's response?
READING CHECK ,
Primary Source
-...........
PERSONAL ACCOUNTS
Trail of Tears
The Cherokee knew that they would be forced to march West, but they did not know that so many of their people would die on the way. Here are two accounts of the Trail of Tears, one written before it started and one written after, both by Cherokee who made the trip.
ANALYSIS
SKILL
ANALYZING POINTS OF VIEW
Mosch 10, 1838
Behiseh Mostksc, I kaw dhoyeh uwbkisuj to yots so Lonsj ... Chesoke&s ose, to be, dsiAS-esv to tk& w&st by tk& oruh kosh of opysos-SCO kt/ to soeh Os MMS (wiMsO Ws tks WO$t, tt wtbb bo Lmyosstbbo... tt ts tbucs oh ous rights oso wusoheh”
—Letter from Jenny, a Cherokee girl, just before her removal
1.	What is different aboutthe concerns of the Cherokee before and after the Trail of Tears?
2.	How do you think the survivors of the Trail of Tears felt when they reached Indian Territory?
“Lony time wt travel ok way to Kew land. People feet bad. when. they leave Old NoHok. Women cry and make sad wasbs, Children cry and marry mere cry... but they say nothing andjwst put heads down and keep ok go towards West. Many days pass and people die very murk.”
—Recollections of a survivor of the Trail of Tears


334 CHAPTER 10
Other Native
Americans Resist
Other Native Americans decided to fight U.S. troops to avoid removal. Chief Black Hawk, a leader of Fox and Sauk Indians, led his people in a struggle to protect their lands in Illinois. By 1832, however, the Sauk forces were running out of food and supplies, and by 1850 they had been forced to leave.
In Florida, Seminole leaders were forced to sign a removal treaty that their followers decided to ignore. A leader named Osceola called upon his people to resist with force, and the Second Seminole War began. Osceola was captured and soon died in prison. His followers, however, continued to fight. Some 4,000 Seminole were removed and hundreds of others killed. Eventually, U.S. officials decided to give up the fight. Small groups of Seminole had resisted removal, and their descendants live in Florida today.
Evaluating How effective
was Native American resistance to removal?
READING CHECK ,
Second Seminole War
GEOGRAPHY
SKILLS L INTERPRETING MAPS
1.	Location In what parts of Florida was the Second Seminole Warfought?
2.	Place Where was the last battle of the Second Seminole War fought?
I SUMMARY AND PREVIEW
President Jackson I supported the removal of thousands of Native Americans from their traditional lands to federal territory. In the next chapter you will learn about the westward growth of the nation as farmers, ranchers, and other settlers moved West.
Section 3 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com I

Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What Native American groups were affected by the Indian Removal Act? Where were they relocated?
b.	Explain Why did government officials want to relocate Native Americans to the West? How was the conflict resolved?
c.	Predict What are some possible effects that the Indian Removal Act might have on Native Americans already living in the West?
2.	a. Analyze What caused the Trail of Tears and what were its effects?
b.	Analyze Why did the state of Georgia want to relocate the Cherokee, and what did the Cherokee do in response?
c.	Analyze What do you think of President Jackson's refusal to enforce the Worcesterv. Georgia ruling?
3.	a. Describe What led to the Second Seminole War? b. Compare and’Contrast How were the Seminole and the Sauk resistance efforts similar and different?
Critical Thinking
4. Comparing and Contrasting Review your notes on Indian removal.Then copy the chart below and use it to identify the Native American groups and their responses to removal.
Native American Group	Response to Removal
	
	
	
	
	
	
"^WriteSmart
5. Understanding Causes and Effects Review this section and identify the causes and effects of the Jackson administration's policy of Indian relocation.
THE AGE OF JACKSON 335,
History and Geography
Jail
KS
Trail of Tears, 1838-39 J In 1830 President Andrew Jackson signed the Indian Removal Act into law. As its name implies, the purpose of the act was to remove Native Americans from land that white settlers wanted for themselves. Five tribes were forced to leave their traditional lands and walk to a territory west of the Mississippi River. The land in the new Indian Territory was land white settlers did not want. It was poor and not good for farming. The poor land made life very difficult for newly arrived Indians. Many died from malnutrition and disease. Within 10 years, about 60,000 Indians had been relocated.
					
Treaty		Indian	; Benefits to United	illijHiHlOSfils	Outcome
	18188®!! llllslll!	Group		i Indian Groups	
Treaty of	) 1795 ;	12 Groups	j Ended battles	; Payment of	Indian land claims disregarded
Greenville		represented	i in Northwest	i $20,000;	by American settlers
			Territory	; acknowledgment	
				i of lands	
Treaty at	1798	; Cherokee	- Received land	; Payment of	Cherokee lands reduced
Holston			promised to	$5,000 and annual	
River			i Cherokee	payments	
Treaty at	1804	Sauk and	; Received land	Annual payment	i Indians claimed their leaders
St. Louis		i Fox	from Sauk and	of $1,000	acted without permission;
			Fox		conflicts arose as settlers
					moved onto Sauk and Fox land
Treaty at	: 1814	; Creek	Ended battles with	Received small	Conflicts between settlers and
Ft. Jackson			i Red Eagle; received 23	. amount of land in	i Creeks led to removal of Creeks
			i million acres of land in	Alabama	to Indian Territory
	r a ? „	! : a,a .	a^	j Georgia		
Treaty of	1830	; Choctaw	! Received all Choctaw	i Received land in	: American settlers reduced
Dancing		1 .aa ■" '	■ . '	lands east of Mississippi	i Indian Territory	available land in Indian
Rabbit	1 . .a '' '	. ...... . .. . . ...	River	'	.S'- S''<'.''S	.	Territory
Creek	a . >' a		?ya / <a< ■' : :	1.SS :■ ■	■	
136 CHAPTER 10

THECHEROKEE

For generations, the Cherokee had called the southern Appalachian Mountain region home. But when they were forced off their land in the Trail of Tears, thousands died.
KY

TN
18°
The Creek had to leave a land rich in variety. It stretched from the ridges and valleys of the Appalachian Mountains in the north, through a region of low hills and valleys, to a flat area of pine forest in the south.

Cherokee


Chickasaw
Creek
AL
GA
Many Seminole Indians refused to leave Florida. They hid in the swamps, battling American soldiers. Many of their descendants still live in Florida today.
-30°
MS
atlawt.-c \ OCEAN
llilil
\c o
■■j
m
<£*
80'
\N
\ %
The Chickasaw lived in a land of rich, black prairie soil. They would find the soil west of the Mississippi much less suited for farming.

THECHOCTAW
90° W
-26° N'
GEOGRAPHY
SKILLS INTERPRETING MAPS
1.	Place How did land in the Indian Territory compare to the land in the Indians' homelands?
2.	Movement How do you think being forced to leave their homelands affected the Indians' way of life?

Tropic of
THE
tCKSON 3'
Social Studies Skills
Analysis
Critical
Thinking
Civic
Participation
Study
Solving Problems
Define the Skill J
Problem solving is a process for finding workable solutions to difficult situations. The process involves asking questions, identifying and evaluating information, comparing and contrasting, and making judgments. Problem solving is useful in studying history because it helps you better understand problems people faced at certain points in time and how they dealt with those difficulties.
The ability to understand and evaluate how people solved problems in the past also can help in solving similar problems today. The skill can also be applied to many other kinds of difficulties besides historical ones. It is a method for thinking through almost any situation.
Learn the Skill
Using the following steps will enable you to better understand and solve problems.
1.	Identify the problem. Ask questions of yourself and others to make sure you know exactly what the situation is and understand why it is a problem.
2.	Gather Information. Ask questions and conduct research to learn more about the problem, such as its history, what caused it, what contributes to it, and other factors.
3.	List options. Based on the information you have gathered, identify possible options for solving the problem that you might consider.
Be aware that your final solution will probably be better and easier to reach if you have
as many options as possible to consider.
4.	Evaluate the options. Weigh each option you are considering. Think of and list the advantages it has as a solution, as well as its potential disadvantages.
5.	Choose and implement a solution. After comparing the advantages and disadvantages of each possible solution, choose the one that seems best and apply it.
6.	Evaluate the solution. Once the solution has been tried, evaluate its effectiveness in solving the problem. This step will tell you if the solution was a good one, or if another of the possible solutions should be tried instead.
[ Practice the Skill
One of the most challenging situations that President Jackson faced was the nullification crisis. You can use the problem-solving skills to better understand this problem and to evaluate his solution for it. Review the information about the nullification crisis in this chapter. Then answer the questions below.
1.	What was the specific problem that Jackson faced? Why was it a problem?
2.	What event led to the problem? What earlier circumstances and conditions contributed to it?
3.	List possible solutions to the problem that you would have considered if you had been president, along with advantages and disadvantages.
4.	Jackson threatened to send troops to South Carolina to enforce federal law. Do you think his solution was the best one? Explain why, or if not, what solution would have been better.
338 CHAPTER 10
CHAPTER
Chapter Review
Visual Summary
Reviewing Vocabulary,
Terms, and People
Complete each sentence by filling in the blank with the correct term or person.
1.	In the Supreme Court case of_________,
the Court ruled that the federal government, not the states, had authority over the Cherokee.
2.	President Jackson's group of advisers was known
as the____________because of where its mem-
bers met in the White House.
3.	___________served as Andrew Jackson's vice
president until he resigned due to the dispute over nullification.
4.	The_____________supported the power of the
states over the federal government.
5.	The practice of rewarding supporters with positions in government is known as the______.
Comprehension and
Critical Thinking
SECTION 1 (Pages 322-324)
6.	a. Identify What changes took place in the early 1800s that broadened democracy in the United States?
b.	Analyze How was Jackson's victory in the election of 1828 a reflection of a change in American politics?
c.	Evaluate Do you think the changes brought about by Jacksonian Democracy went far enough in expanding democracy? Why or why not?
SECTION 2 (Pages 326-331)
7.	a. Describe What conflicts troubled the Jackson administration?
THE AGE OF JACKSON 339
b.	Summarize What were the issues surrounding the Supreme Court case McCulloch v. Maryland, how were they resolved, and what effects did the decision have?
c.	Draw Conclusions What were the results of the conflict over the Second Bank of the United States?
d.	Predict How might sectional differences and the debate over states' rights lead to future problems for the United States?
SECTION 3 (Pages 332-335)
8.	a. Identify Who was Sequoya? What important contribution did he make?
b.	Define What was Indian Territory?
Where was it?
c.	Contrast In what different ways did the Cherokee and the Seminole attempt to resist removal to Indian Territory?
d.	Elaborate Do you agree with Jackson's refusal to enforce the Worcester v. Georgia ruling? Why or why not?
Reviewing Themes
9.	Politics What new political party rose in opposition to President Andrew Jackson? What was the party's attitude toward the power of the president?
10.	Economics What economic factors influenced the policy of Indian removal?
Using the Internet
11.	Activity: Writing a newspaper Through your online textbook, research Andrew Jackson's presidency. Then use your research to write a party newspaper that supports or criticizes Jackson's policies. Write from the point of view of a Jackson supporter or from the point of view of a political enemy. Be sure to provide evidence to support your opinions.
/T' hmhsocialstudies.com
Reading Skills	1
Drawing Conclusions about the Past Use the Reading Skills taught in Ms chapter to answer the question about the reading selection below.
Native Americans had long lived in settlements stretching from Georgia to Mississippi. However, President Jackson and other political leaders wanted to open this land to settlement by American farmers, (p. 332)
- ..............
12.	Which statement below can you conclude from the passage above?
a.	Farmers moved onto the Native Americans' land after removal.
b.	Native Americans wanted to move from their lands.
c.	Native Americans resisted removal.
d.	Government officials had to use force to remove Native Americans from their land.
Social Studies Skills
Solving Problems Use the Social Studies Skills taught in this chapter to answer the question below.
13.	Using the steps listed in the Social Studies Skill on page 338, outline a solution to the problem the Cherokee nation faced under Jackson's administration.
14. Writing Interview Questions Review the notes you have taken about Jackson's political significance, the conflicts he was involved in, and the causes and effects of his policies toward Indians. Then, based on your notes, begin writing questions for your interview with Jackson. What will the readers of your newspaper want to learn more about? Write at least 10 interview questions that your readers will want answered.
With another student, play the roles of Jackson and interviewer. If you aren't sure you understand a question or know the answer, discuss the question and correct answer with your partner. Be sure to use the chapter vocabulary you have learned.
340 CHAPTER 10
CHAPTER
Texas Test Practice
DIRECTIONS:
Read each question and write the letter of the best response. 1	The era surrounding the presidency of Andrew Jackson is best known for an expansion in
A freedom of speech.
B religious toleration.
C states’ rights.
D voting rights.
2	Which of the following was important to the South’s economy in the 1830s?
F manufacturing G plantation agriculture H shipbuilding J weaving
3	What action did the Cherokee take to resist their removal from Georgia and North Carolina to the West?
A sued the state of Georgia in the courts B destroyed neighbors’ farms and businesses C went to war against the U.S. government D staged a protest called the Trail of Tears
4	The debate between John C. Calhoun and Daniel Webster over states’ rights was most like the debate between
F the Patriots and the Loyalists.
G the Antifederalists and the Federalists.
H
England and France during the French and Indian War. J the large states and the small states during the Constitutional Convention.
6	The ruling in the Supreme Court case of Worcester v. Georgia
F established the policy of Indian removal.
G determined that Georgia laws did not apply to the Cherokee.
H was enforced by President Andrew Jackson.
J established protective tariffs for imported goods.
7	Read the following quote from Daniel Webster’s “Liberty and Union, Now and Forever, One and Inseparable” speech and use it to answer the question below.
zz... [T]he people have wisely provided, in the Constitution itself, a proper, suitable mode and tribunal for settling questions of constitutional law. There are in the Constitution grants of powers to Congress, and restrictions on these powers. There are, also, prohibitions on the states...
... I profess, sir, in my career hitherto, to have kept steadily in view the prosperity and honor of the whole country, and the preservation of our federal Union...
... Liberty and Union, now and forever, one and inseparable!
- Daniel Webster, “Liberty and Union, Now and Forever, One and Inseparable” 1830
Document-Based Question How does Webster appeal to listeners to preserve the Union?
5	President Jackson’s weakening of the
Second Bank of the United States resulted in
A inflation and other economic problems.
B the nullification crisis.
C the rise of the Democratic Party.
D increasing sectionalism.
THE AGE OF JACKSON
Essential Question	Q
How did westward expansion transform the nation?
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS)
A, 6A, 6B, 6C, 6D, 6E, 7D, 10A, 10B, IOC, 11A, 11B, 12A, 12D, 22B, 23A, 23C, 23D, 29A, 29C, 29H,29I,29J
SECTION 1: Trails to the West............................346
The Big Idea The American West attracted a variety of settlers.
SECTION 2: The Texas Revolution..........................350
The Big Idea In 1836, Texas gained its independence from Mexico.
SECTION 3: The Mexican-American War......................354
The Big Idea The ideal of manifest destiny and the outcome of the Mexican-American War led to U.S. expansion to the Pacific Ocean.
SECTION 4: The California Gold Rush......................364
The Big Idea The California gold rush changed the future of the West.
UNITED
States
1811
John Jacob Astor founds the fur-trading post Astoria on the Columbia River.
Outline for a Documentary Film Many documentary films have been made about the history of the United States, but there is always room for one more. In this chapter you will read about the westward expansion of the United States, a period filled with excitement and challenge. Then you will create an outline for a documentary film to be used in middle-school history classes.
