472 CHAPTER 15
1848
The Free-Soil Party is formed on August 9.
1848
Revolutionary movements sweep across Europe.
Reading Social Studies
Economics	Geography
Politics
Society and Culture
Science and Technology
FOCUS on Themes This chapter describes the growing tension between the North and the South over the slavery issue. You will read what happened as more states were admitted to the Union and people argued if they should be slave states or not. You will
read about events that widened the division between the North and South so that the South finally chose to secede from the Union. Throughout the chapter you will see that cultural differences influenced political decisions.
Categorizing
FOCUS
On Reading Have you ever read a schoolbook and been overwhelmed by the amount of information it contained? Categorizing events, people, and ideas can help you make sense of the facts you learn in this book. Understanding Categorizing Ideas, people, events, and things can all be categorized in many different ways. For the study of history, some of the most useful ways are by time period and by similarity between events. Categorizing events by the people involved can also be helpful. Within a category, you can make subcategories to further organize the information.
F
People
Events
John C. Calhoun Henry Clay Anthony Burns Harriet Beecher Stowe Stephen Douglas Charles Summer Preston Brooks James Buchanan Dred Scott Abraham Lincoln John Brown Jefferson Davis
•	Publication of Unde Tom's Cabin
•	Pottawatomie Massacre
•	Lincoln-Dogulas debates
•	Secession of southern states
•	Legislation
a
Legislation
•	Wilmot Proviso
•	Compromise of 1850
•	Fugitive Slave Act
•	Kansas-Nebraska Act
•	Freeport Doctrine
•	Crittenden Compromise
474 CHAPTER 15
You Try It!
The following passage is from the chapter you are getting ready to read. As you read the passage, look for ways to organize the information.
Election of 1852
The opposing Whigs also held their conven- From tion in 1852. In other presidential elections, ^484^ they had nominated well-known former generals such as William Henry Harrison and Zachary Taylor. This had been a good strategy, as both men had won. The Whigs decided to choose another war hero. They passed over the current president, Millard Fillmore, because they believed that his strict enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act would cost votes. Instead, they chose Winfield Scott, a Mexican War hero. Southerners did not trust Scott, however, because he had not fully supported the Compromise of 1850.
II I | I ! I . I I I 111.
.IIITlin nrnwi~-^ After you read the passage, answer the following questions.
1.	What are two categories you could use to organize the information in this passage?
2.	How many different kinds of people are mentioned in this passage?
3.	What different political parties are mentioned in this passage?
4.	Complete the chart below using the information from the passage above.
People involved	Political parties involved	Views discussed
		
		
		
Chapter 15
Section 1
popular sovereignty (p. 476) Wilmot Proviso (p. 476) sectionalism (p. 477)
Free-Soi, Party (p. 477) secede (p. 478)
Compromise of 1850 (p. 479) Fugitive Slave Act (p. 479)
Anthony Burns (p. 480)
Uncle Tom's Cabin (p. 481)
Harriet Beecher Stowe (p. 481)
Section 2
Franklin Pierce (p. 483)
Stephen Douglas (p. 484) Kansas-Nebraska Act (p. 485) Pottawatomie Massacre Ip. 487) Charles Sumner (p. 487)
Preston Brooks (p. 487)
Section 3
Republican Party (p. 488)
James Buchanan (p. 488)
John C. Fremont Ip. 489)
Dred Scott (p. 489)
Roger B. Taney (p. 490)
Abraham Lincoln (p. 490) Lincoln-Douglas debates (p. 491) Freeport Doctrine Ip. 492) Section 4
John Brown's raid (p. 493)
John C. Breckinridge (p. 495) Constitutional Union Party Ip. 495) John Bell (p. 495)
John J. Crittenden (p. 496) Confederate States of America
Ip. 497)
Jefferson Davis Ip. 497)
Academic Vocabulary
In this chapter, you will learn the following academic words:
implications (p. 485) complex (p 489)
A DIVIDED NATION 47
1
1
SECTION

TEKS 1A,6D,7B,7C,7D,8B,17B, 24A, 26A, 26B
What You Will Learn...
The addition of new land in the West renewed disputes over the expansion of slavery. The Compromise of 1850 tried to solve the disputes over slavery.
The Fugitive Slave Act caused more controversy. Abolitionists used antislavery literature to promote opposition.
T
Antislavery literature and the annexation of new lands intensified the debate over slavery.
Key Terms and People
popular sovereignty, p. 476 Wilmot Proviso, p. 476 sectionalism, p. 477 Free-Soil Party, p. 477 secede, p. 478 Compromise of 1850, p. 479 Fugitive Slave Act, p. 479 Anthony Burns, p. 480 Uncle Tom's Cabin, p. 481 Harriet Beecher Stowe, p. 481
hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the sequence of events in the debate over slavery and the effects of each.
The Debate oveF Slavery
If YOU were there...
You live in a crowded neighborhood in New York City in 1854.
Your apartment building is home to a variety of people—long-time residents, Irish immigrants, free African Americans. One day federal marshals knock on your door. They claim that one of your neighbors is a fugitive slave. The marshals say you must help them find her. If you don't, you will be fined or even sent to jail.
What would you tell the federal marshals?
BUILDING BACKGROUND
Some reform movements of the 1800s I drew stubborn and often violent opposition. This was especially true ! ofthe abolitionist movement. Pro-slavery supporters fought for laws to j • protect slavery and extend the slave system. These laws were a threat
to African Americans in the North.
New Land Renews Slavery Disputes
The United States added more than 500,000 square miles of land as a result of winning the Mexican-American War in 1848. The additional land caused bitter debate about slavery. The Missouri Compromise of 1820 had divided the Louisiana Purchase into either free or slave regions. It prohibited slavery north of latitude 36°30' but let Missouri become a slave state. In the 1840s President James K. Polk wanted to extend the 36°30' line to the West coast, dividing the Mexican Cession into two parts—one free and one enslaved. Some leaders, including Senator Lewis Cass of Michigan, encouraged popular sovereignty, the idea that political power belongs to the people, who should decide on banning or allowing slavery.
Regional Differences about Slavery
Some northerners wanted to outlaw slavery in all parts of the Mexican Cession. During the war, Representative David Wilmot offered the Wilmot Proviso, a document stating that "neither slavery nor involuntary servitude shall ever exist in any part of [the] territory."
476 CHAPTER 15
Upsetting the Balance
GEOGRAPHY
SKILLS INTERPRETING MAPS
Region How could the admission of California as a slave state or a free state upset the balance between North and South?
Connecticut
Illinois
Indiana
Maine
Massachusetts Michigan New Hampshire New Jersey New York Ohio
Pennsylvania Rhode Island Vermont Wisconsin
The northern-controlled House passed the document, but in the Senate, the South had more power. The Wilmot Proviso did not pass. Before this time, politicians had usually supported the ideas of their political parties. However, the Wilmot Proviso spurred a debate that showed growing sectionalism, or favoring the interests of one section or region over the interests of the entire country.
To attract voters, the Democrats and the Whigs did not take a clear position on slavery in the presidential campaign of 1848. In response, antislavery northerners formed a new party, the Free-Soil Party, which supported the Wilmot Proviso. They worried that slave labor would mean fewer jobs for white workers. Party members chose former president Martin Van Buren as their candidate. The new party won 10 percent of" the popular vote, drawing away votes from Democrat Lewis Cass. Whig candidate Zach-" ary Taylor won a narrow victory.
The California Question
The California gold rush caused such rapid population growth that California applied to join the Union as a state instead of as a territory. But would California enter the Union as a free state or a slave state?
Most Californians opposed slavery, which had been illegal when the state was part of Mexico. Also, many forty-niners had come from free states. But if California became a free state, the balance between free and slave states would change, favoring the free states.
In the South, an imbalance was unacceptable. "We are about permanently to destroy the balance of power between the sections," said Senator Jefferson Davis of Mississippi. He and many other southerners did not want California to enter the Union as a free state.
Drawing Inferences
Why did sectionalism in the United States increase in the late 1840s?
READING CHECK
Slave States
Alabama
Arkansas
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maryland
Mississippi
Missouri
North Carolina
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Virginia
THE IMPACT
TODAY
Small parties are today called “third parties." They often receive support from voters who disagree with the policies of the two major parties on a specific issue.
A DIVIDED NATION 477
Compromise of 1850
Senator Henry Clay of Kentucky had helped to settle the Missouri crisis of 1819-20 and the nullification crisis of 1832-33 by proposing compromises. He now had another plan to help the nation maintain peace. His ideas were designed to give both sides things that they wanted:
Primary Source
.-..—...~.•—................
SPEECH
! The Seventh of March Speech
1.	California would enter the Union as a free state.
2.	The rest of the Mexican Cession would be federal land. In this territory popular sovereignty would decide on slavery.
3.	Texas would give up land east of the upper Rio Grande. In return, the government would pay Texas's debts from when it was an independent republic.
4.	The slave trade—but not slavery— would end in the nation's capital.
5.	A more effective fugitive slave law would be passed.
On March 7, 1850, Daniel Webster spoke on the floor of the Senate in favor of the Compromise of 1850.
I hear with distress and anguish the word "secession." Secession! Peaceable secession! Sir, \% your eyes and mine are never destined to see the miracle. The dismemberment [taking apart] of this vast country without convulsion! The break-ing up of the fountains of the great deep with-
out ruffing the surface! Who is so foolish, I beg every body's pardon, as to expect to see any such thing?.. .There can be no such thing as peaceable secession.
—quoted in Daniel Webster:The Completest Man, edited by Kenneth Shewmaker
Webster is upset by talk of secession.
1
Webster is saying that just as it is impossible to move water in the ocean without making waves, it is impossible for states to peace-
Daniel Webster spoke eloquently in support of the compromise.
Clay's plan drew attack, especially regarding California. Senator William Seward of New York defended antislavery views and wanted California admitted "directly, without conditions, without qualifications, and without compromise." However, Senator John C. Calhoun of South Carolina argued that letting California enter as a free state would destroy the nation's balance. He warned people of issues that would later start the Civil War. Calhoun asked that the slave states be allowed to secede —formally withdraw—from the Union.
In contrast, Senator Daniel Webster of Massachusetts favored Clay's plan:
I wish to speak today, not as a Massachusetts man, nor as a Northern man, but as an American... I speak today for the preservation of the Union. Hear me for my cause/^
—Daniel Webster, quoted in Battle Cry of Freedom by James M. McPherson
Fugitive Slave Act
The newly passed Fugitive Slave Act made it a crime to help runaway slaves and allowed officials to arrest those slaves in free areas. Slaveholders were permitted to take suspected fugitives to U.S. commissioners, who decided their fate.
Webster criticized northern abolitionists and southerners who talked of secession.
A compromise was enacted that year and seemed to settle most disputes between free and slave states. It achieved the majority of Clay's proposals. With the Compromise of 1850, California was able to enter the Union as a free state. The rest of the Mexican Cession was divided into two territories—Utah and New Mexico—where the question of whether to allow slavery would be decided by popular sovereignty.
Texas agreed to give up its land claims in New Mexico in exchange for financial aid from the federal government. The compromise outlawed the slave trade in the District of Columbia and established a new fugitive slave law.
Analyzing How was Texas affected by the Compromise of 1850?
Details of the Fugitive Slave Act
Slaveholders could use testimony from white witnesses, but enslaved African Americans accused of being fugitives could not testify. Nor could people who hid or helped a runaway slave—they faced six months in jail and a $1,000 fine. Commissioners who rejected a slaveholder's claim earned $5 while those who returned suspected fugitives to slaveholders earned $10. Clearly, the commissioners benefited from helping slaveholders.
Reactions to the Fugitive Slave Act
Enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act began immediately. In September 1850—the same month the law was passed—federal marshals arrested African American James Hamlet. They returned him to a slaveholder in
Reading Check
Primary Source
SPEECH
Southern View of the Compromise of 1850
John C. Calhoun from South Carolina wrote a speech saying that the proposed compromise did not go far enough to satisfy the South.
M\ have, senators, believed from the first that the agitation of the subject of slavery would, if not prevented by some timely and effective measure, end in disunion.. .The South asks for
justice, simple justice, and less she ought not to take. She has no compromise to offer but the Constitution, and no conces-
sion or surrender to make/J	*
ANALYSIS
SKILLS ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
Why did Calhoun urge southern senators to vote against the compromise?
I
1
Agitation means "unrest."
Calhoun believes the South's position was supported by the Constitution.
A DIVIDED NATION 47S
Primary Source
PHOTOGRAPH
A
Fugitive Slave Convention The Fugitive Slave Act enraged abolitionists. To protest the new law, they held many meetings to publicly denounce it. One such meeting was held in 1850 in the small town of Cazenovia in central New York, a center for abolitionist activity. About 2,000 people—including many former slaves— attended the convention. They listened to speeches, made plans, and raised their voices for freedom. This photo was a point of pride for the delegates, but it also was used by opponents of the movement as a symbol of the poor morals of abolitionists: Not only were whites allowed to mix with African Americans, but women and men were allowed to mix as well.This angered many people.
The Edmonson sisters, Mary (left) and Emily, tried to escape from slavery but were captured. Abolitionists later purchased their freedom.
Maryland, although he had lived in New York City for three years.
Thousands of northern African Americans fled to Canada in fear. In the 10 years after Congress passed the Fugitive Slave Act, some 343 fugitive slave cases were reviewed. The accused fugitives were declared free in only 11 cases.
The Fugitive Slave Act upset northerners, who were uncomfortable with the commissioners' power. Northerners disliked the idea of a trial without a jury. They also disapproved of commissioners' higher fees for returning slaves. Most were horrified that some free African Americans had been captured and sent to the South.
Most northerners opposed to the Act peacefully resisted, but violence did erupt. In 1854 Anthony Burns, a fugitive slave from Virginia, was arrested in Boston. Abolitionists used force while trying to rescue him from jail, killing a deputy marshal. A federal ship was ordered to return Burns to Virginia after his trial. Many people in the North, particularly in Massachusetts, were outraged. The event persuaded many to join the abolitionist cause.
Drawing Conclusions
What concerns did northerners have about the Fugitive Slave Act?
READING CHECK ,
480 CHAPTER 15
Antislavery Literature
Abolitionists in the North used the stories of fugitive slaves like James Hamlet and Anthony Bums to gain sympathy for their cause. Slave narratives also educated people about their hardships.
Fiction also informed people about the evils of slavery. Uncle Tom's Cabin, the antislavery novel written by Harriet Beecher Stowe, spoke out powerfully against slavery. Stowe, the daughter of Connecticut minister Lyman Beecher, moved to Ohio when she was 21. There she met fugitive slaves and learned about the cruelties of slavery. The Fugitive Slave Act greatly angered Stowe. She decided to write a book that would educate northerners about the realities of slavery.
Uncle Tom's Cabin was published in 1852. The main character, a kindly enslaved African American named Tom, is taken from his wife and sold "down the river" in Louisiana. Tom becomes the slave of cruel Simon Legree. In a rage, Legree has Tom beaten to death.
The novel electrified the nation and sparked outrage in the South. Louisa McCord, a famous southern writer, questioned the "foul imagination which could invent such scenes."
Within a decade, more than 2 million copies of Uncle Tom's Cabin had been sold in the United States. The book's popularity caused one northerner to remark that Stowe and her book had created "two millions of abolitionists." Stowe later wrote A Key to Uncle Tom's Cabin to answer those who had criticized her book.
The impact of Stowe's book is suggested by her reported meeting with Abraham Lincoln in 1862, a year after the start of the Civil War. Lincoln supposedly said to Stowe that she was "the little lady who made this big war." Her book is still widely read today as a source of information about the harsh realities of slavery.
Reading Check
Identifying Cause and Effect
Why did abolitionists use antislavery literature to promote their cause, and what effect did it have on the slavery debate?
■ Summary and Preview The united I States experienced increasing disagreement over the issue of slavery. The Compromise of 1850 and the Fugitive Slave Act tried to address these disagreements with legislation. In the next section you will read about another disputed law concerning slavery, the Kansas-Nebraska Act, and
the violence it sparked.
Section 1 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Describe What ideas did the Free-Soil Party promote?
b.	Predict What are some possible results of the growing sectional debate over slavery?
c.	Explain How did the Mexican Cession affect politics in the United States?
2.	a. Describe What were the major points of the Compromise of 1850?
b. Contrast What differing opinions emerged toward Henry Clay's proposed compromise? What were the opinions of Daniel Webster and John C. Calhoun?
3.	a. Identify What were the effects of the Fugitive Slave Act? b. Draw Conclusions Why did some Americans believe the Fugitive Slave Act was unfair?
4.	a. Identify What are three examples of antislavery literature? b. Elaborate Do you think literature was an effective tool against slavery? Why or why not?
Critical Thinking
5.	Evaluating Review your notes on the debate over slavery. Then evaluate how the Compromise of 1850, the Fugitive Slave Act, and antislavery literature affected the slavery debate. Use a graphic organizer like the one below.
6. Taking Notes on the Debate over Slavery Make some notes on the Wilmot Proviso, the Free-Soil Party, the Compromise of 1850, and the Fugitive Slave Act. Decide how your character feels about each of these. How do the Compromise of 1850 and the Fugitive Slave Act affect your character?

Literature in History
j Antislavery Literature
from Uncle Tom’s
Cabin
Guided Reading
Word Help
conceive imagine desolate alone forlorn unhappy slacking slowing down thither there
O
What detail tells you how | long Eliza has walked up to | this point? ■	■■	■ ■	i
■	■	■	j
© Why do you think she chooses that escape route?
by Harriet Beecher Stowe (1811-1896)
About the Reading Published nine years before the outbreak of the Civil War, Uncle Tom's Cabin focused the nation's attention on the cruelties of slavery. In the following section, Stowe describes how a slave named Eliza is trying to escape to save her son from being sold.
ASYOU READ J
Look for details that appeal to your feelings.
J
5
It is impossible to conceive of a human creature more wholly desolate and forlorn than Eliza when she turned her footsteps from Uncle Tom's cabin ...
The boundaries of the farm, the grove, the wood lot passed by her dizzily as she walked on; and still she went, leaving one familiar object after another, slacking not, pausing not, till reddening daylight found her many a long mile from all traces of any familiar objects upon the open highway. O
She had often been, with her mistress, to visit some connections in the little town of T—, not far from the Ohio River, and knew the road well. © To go thither, to escape across the Ohio River, were the first hurried outlines of her plan of escape; beyond that she could only hope in God ...
Connecting Literature to History
1. Slaves had no legal rights. They were considered to be property, not human beings. How do the
actions and description in this passage contradict these ideas about slaves?
i
2. Frederick Douglass, Sojourner Truth, and other former slaves wrote narratives about their experiences. Yet these true stories did not have as much impact as Stowe's novel. Why do you think this fictional story about slavery had more impact than true slave narratives?
482 CHAPTER 15


If YOU were there...
You live on a New England farm in 1855. You often think about moving West. But the last few harvests have been bad, and you can't afford it. Now the Emigrant Aid Society offers to help you get to Kansas. To bring in antislavery voters like you, they'll give you a wagon, livestock, and farm machines. Still, you know that Kansas might be dangerous.
Would you decide to risk settling in Kansas?
What You Will Learn...
——
1.	The debate over the expansion of slavery influenced the election of 1852.
2.	The Kansas-Nebraska Act allowed voters to allow or prohibit slavery.
3.	Pro-slavery and antislavery groups clashed violently
in what became known as "Bleeding Kansas."
BUILDING BACKGROUND
The argument over the extension of slavery grew stronger and more bitter. It dominated American politics in the mid-1800s. Laws that tried to find compromises ended by causing more violence. The bloodiest battleground of this period was in Kansas. The Kansas-Nebraska Act heightened tensions in the conflict over slavery.
Election of 1852
Four leading candidates for the Democratic presidential nomination emerged in 1852. It became clear that none of them would win a majority of votes. Frustrated delegates at the Democratic National Convention turned to Franklin Pierce, a little-known politician from New Hampshire. Pierce promised to honor the Compromise
Key Terms and People
Franklin Pierce, p. 483 Stephen Douglas, p. 484 Kansas-Nebraska Act, p. 485 Pottawatomie Massacre, p. 487 Charles Sumner, p. 487 Preston Brooks, p. 487
hmhsocialstudies.com 1
TAKING NOTES
jMURDER!!!
ineighbors help, Owy pwiWih ; »no Children .	I
forcing slavery down the throat of a freesoiler
This political cartoon shows proslavery politicians forcing slavery on a settler in Kansas who is a member of the antislavery Free-Soil political party.
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on Stephen Douglas's plan for a railroad to the Pacific Ocean, southern congressmem-bers' views of his plan, and the resulting Kansas-Nebraska Act.
A DIVIDED NATION
From Compromise to Conflict
The Missouri Compromise, 1820 Under the Missouri Compromise of 1820, there are an equal number of free states (orange) and slave states (green).
| Free state I 1 Free territory H Slave state Bill Slave territory
Popular sovereignty
The Compromise of 1850 The Compromise of 1850 allowed for one more free state than slave state, but also passed a strict fugitive slave law.
W
Wa
of 1850 and the Fugitive Slave Act. Therefore, southerners trusted Pierce on the issue of slavery.
The opposing Whigs also held their convention in 1852. In other presidential elections, they had nominated well-known former generals such as William Henry Harrison and Zachary Taylor. This had been a good strategy, as both men had won. The Whigs decided to choose another war hero. They passed over the current president, Millard Fillmore, because they believed that his strict enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act would cost votes. Instead, they chose Winfield Scott, a Mexican War hero. Southerners did not trust Scott, however, because he had not fully supported the Compromise of 1850.
Pierce won the election of 1852 by a large margin. Many Whigs viewed the election as a painful defeat, not just for their candidate, but for their party.
READING CHECK
Drawing Conclusions
What issues determined the outcome of the presidential election of 1852?
The Kansas-Nebraska Act
In his inaugural address, President Pierce expressed his hope that the slavery issue had been put to rest "and that no sectional . . . excitement may again threaten the durability [stability] of our institutions." Less than a year later, however, a proposal to build a railroad to the West coast helped revive the slavery controversy and opened a new period of sectional conflict.
Douglas and the Railroad
Ever since entering Congress in the mid-1840s, Stephen Douglas had supported the idea of building a railroad to the Pacific Ocean. Douglas favored a line running from Chicago. The first step toward building such a railroad would be organizing what remained of the Louisiana Purchase into a federal territory. The Missouri Compromise required that this land be free territory and eventually free states.
Southerners in Congress did not support Douglas's plan, recommending a southern route for the railroad. Their preferred line
484 CHAPTER 15
question of slavery is to be decided by popular sovereignty—by the people who vote in the elections there—in the newly organized territories of Kansas and Nebraska. The act sparked violent conflict between pro-slavery and antislavery groups.
SKILLS INTERPRETING MAPS
1.	Region In what part of the United States were the slave states located?
2.	Place What free state was added with the Compromise of 1850?
ran from New Orleans, across Texas and New Mexico Territory, to southern California. Determined to have the railroad start in Chicago, Douglas asked a few key southern senators to support his plan. They agreed to do so if the new territory west of Missouri was opened to slavery.
Two New Territories
In January 1854, Douglas introduced what became the Kansas-Nebraska Act, a plan that would divide the remainder of the Louisiana Purchase into two territories—Kansas and Nebraska—and allow the people in each territory to decide on the question of slavery. The act would eliminate the Missouri Compromise's restriction on slavery north of the 36° 30 Tine.
Antislavery northerners were outraged by the implications. Some believed the proposal was part of a terrible plot to turn free territory into a "dreary region . . . inhabited by masters and slaves." All across the North, citizens attended protest meetings and sent anti-Nebraska petitions to Congress.
Even so, with strong southern support— and with Douglas and President Pierce pressuring their fellow Democrats to vote for it— the measure passed both houses of Congress and was signed into law on May 30, 1854. Lost amid all the controversy over the territorial bill was Douglas's proposed railroad to the Pacific Ocean. Congress would not approve the construction of such a railroad until 1862.
Kansas Divided
Antislavery and pro-slavery groups rushed their supporters to Kansas. One of the people who spoke out strongly against slavery in Kansas was Senator Seward.
^Gentlemen of the Slave States... I accept [your challenge] in... the cause of freedom. We will engage in competition for... Kansas, and God give the victory to the side which is stronger in numbers as it is in right."
—William Henry Seward, quoted in The Impending Crisis, 1848-1861 by David M. Potter
Elections for the Kansas territorial legislature were held in March 1855. Almost 5,000
Academic
Vocabulary
implications
things that are inferred or deduced
A DIVIDED NATION 485
pro-slavery voters crossed the border from Missouri, voted in Kansas, and then returned home. As a result, the new legislature had a huge pro-slavery majority. The members of the legislature passed strict laws that made it a crime to question slaveholders' rights and said that those who helped fugitive slaves could be put to death. In protest, antislavery Kansans formed their own legislature 25 miles away in Topeka. President Pierce, however, only recognized the pro-slavery legislature.
Reading Check
Analyzing Why did northerners dislike the Kansas-Nebraska Act?
FOCUS ON
Reaping What categories can you use to organize events in Kansas?
Bleeding Kansas
By early 1856 Kansas had two opposing governments, and the population was angry. Settlers had moved to Kansas to homestead in peace, but the controversy over slavery began to affect everyone.
In April 1856, a congressional committee arrived in Kansas to decide which government was legitimate. Although committee members declared the election of the proslavery legislature to be unfair, the federal government did not agree.
Attack on Lawrence
The new pro-slavery settlers owned guns, and antislavery settlers received weapons shipments from friends in the East. Then, violence broke out. In May 1856 a proslavery grand jury in Kansas charged leaders of the antislavery government with treason. About 800 men rode to the city of Lawrence to arrest the antislavery leaders, but they had fled. The posse took its anger out on Lawrence by setting fires, looting buildings, and destroying presses used to print antislavery newspapers. One man was killed in the pro-slavery attack that became known as the Sack of Lawrence.
John Brown's Response
Abolitionist John Brown was from New England, but he and some of his sons had moved to Kansas in 1855. The Sack of Lawrence made him determined to "fight fire with fire" and to "strike terror in the hearts of the pro-slavery people." On the night of May 24, 1856, along Pottawatomie Creek,
486
Brown and his men killed five pro-slavery men in Kansas in what became known as the Pottawatomie Massacre. Brown and his men dragged the pro-slavery men out of their cabins and killed them with swords. The abolitionist band managed to escape capture. Brown declared that his actions had been ordered by God.
Kansas collapsed into civil war, and about 200 people were killed. The events in "Bleeding Kansas" became national front-page stories. In September 1856, a new territorial governor arrived and began to restore order.
Brooks Attacks Sumner
Congress also reacted to the violence of the Sack of Lawrence. Senator Charles Sumner of Massachusetts criticized pro-slavery people in Kansas and personally insulted Andrew Pickens Butler, a pro-slavery senator from South Carolina. Representative Preston Brooks, a relative of Butler's, responded strongly.
On May 22, 1856, Brooks used a walking cane to beat Sumner unconscious in the Senate chambers. Dozens of southerners sent Brooks new canes, but northerners were out-
raged and called the attacker "Bully Brooks." Brooks only had to pay a $300 fine to the federal court. It took Sumner three years before he was well enough to return to the Senate.
Summarizing What were
some ofthe results ofthe intense division in Kansas?
Reading Check .
The cartoon above shows Preston Brooks beating Charles Sumner with his cane. Sumner's only protection is a quill pen symbolically representing the law.
SUMMARY AND PREVIEW
The Kansas-Nebraska Act produced a national uproar. In the next section you will read about divisions in political parties. Section 2 Assessment
,WjT| hmhsocialstudies.com

Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What issues influenced the outcome ofthe election of 1852?
b. Draw Conclusions Why did northern and southern Democrats support Franklin Pierce?
2.	a. Recall What did the Kansas-Nebraska Act do?
b.	Explain Why did antislavery and pro-slavery groups encourage people to move to Kansas?
c.	Evaluate Would you have supported or opposed the Kansas-Nebraska Act? Why?
3.	a. Describe What was the Pottawatomie Massacre?
b.	Analyze How did Charles Sumner's views on "Bleeding Kansas"create conflict?
c.	Elaborate Do you think Preston Brooks's punishment was reasonable? Why or why not?
Critical Thinking
4.	Sequencing Review your notes on the Kansas-Nebraska Act. Then copy the graphic organizer
shown below and use it to show how the act and later events led to violence in Kansas.
V	\
V	\
V- _ \
5. Taking Notes on the Trouble in Kansas Make some notes on the election of 1852, the Kansas-Nebraska Act, and the events in Kansas. Decide how your character feels about each of these. How do these events affect your character?
A DIVIDED NATION 4

SECTION
3
TEKS 5C,7C,88,17B, 18C,21A
What You Will Learn...
. Political parties in the United
States underwent change due to the movement to expand slavery.
. The Dred Scottdecision created further division over the issue of slavery.
, The Lincoln-Douglas debates brought much attention to the conflict over slavery.
If YOU were there...
You are traveling through Michigan in July 1854. As you pass through the town of Jackson, you see a crowd of several hundred people gathered under the trees. You join them and find that it is a political rally. Antislavery supporters from different parties are meeting to form a new political party. Speakers promise to fight slavery "until the contest be terminated."
How do you think this new party will affect American politics?
The split over the issue of slavery intensified due to political division and judicial decisions.
BUILDING BACKGROUND
The slavery question continued to divide the country and lead to violence. The issue not only dominated American politics in the mid-1800s but also brought changes in the makeup of American political parties. Key Terms and People
Republican Party, p. 488 James Buchanan, p. 488 John C. Fremont, p. 489 Dred Scott, p. 489 Roger B. Taney, p. 490 Abraham Lincoln, p. 490 Lincoln-Douglas debates, p. 491 Freeport Doctrine, p. 492
hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the effects of political divisions and the Dred Scott case on the debate over slavery.
Political Parties Undergo Change
Democrat Stephen Douglas had predicted that the Kansas-Nebraska Act would "raise a... storm." He was right. The Kansas-Nebraska Act brought the slavery issue back into the national spotlight. Some Whigs, Democrats, Free-Soilers, and abolitionists joined in 1854 to form the Republican Party, a political party united against the spread of slavery in the West.
Democrats were in trouble. Those who supported the Kansas-Nebraska Act were not re-elected. The Whig Party also fell apart when northern and southern Whigs refused to work together. A senator from Connecticut complained, "The Whig Party has been killed off ... by that miserable Nebraska business." Some Whigs and Democrats joined the American Party, also known as the Know-Nothing Party. At the party's convention, delegates argued over slavery, then chose former president Millard Fillmore as their candidate for the election of 1856.
The Democrats knew they could not choose a strong supporter of the Kansas-Nebraska Act, such as President Pierce or Senator Douglas. They nominated James Buchanan of Pennsylvania. Buchanan had a great deal of political experience as Polk's secretary of state. Most
488 CHAPTER 15
important, he had been in Great Britain as ambassador during the Kansas-Nebraska Act dispute and had not been involved in the debate.
At their first nominating convention, the Republicans chose explorer John C. Fremont as their candidate. He had little political experience, but he stood against the spread of slavery. The public saw Republicans as a single-issue party. They had almost no supporters outside of the free states.
On election day, Buchanan won 14 of the 15 slave states and became the new president. Fremont won 11 of the 16 free states. Fillmore won only one state—Maryland. Buchanan had won the election.
Reading Check
Summarizing What were the major political parties in the election of 1856, and who was the candidate for each party?
Dred Scott Decision
Just two days after Buchanan became presi-
dent, the Supreme Court issued a historic
ruling about slavery. News of the decision
threw the country back into crisis. The Court Academic
reviewed and decided the complex case involv- Vocabulary
ing an enslaved man named Dred Scott.	c°'nplex
°	difficult, not
simple
Dred Scott Sues for Freedom
Dred Scott was the slave of Dr. John Emerson,
an army surgeon who lived in St. Louis, Mis-
souri. In the 1830s, Emerson had taken Scott
on tours of duty in Illinois and the Wisconsin
Territory. After they returned to Missouri, the
doctor died, and Scott became the slave of
Emerson's widow. In 1846 Scott sued for his
freedom in the Missouri state courts, arguing
that he had become free when he lived in
free territory. Though a lower court ruled in
Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857)
Background of the Case Born a slave in Virginia, Dred Scott moved with his slaveholder to the free state of Illinois and then to the Wisconsin Territory. After returning to the South, Scott sued for his freedom. He claimed that because he had lived in a state that banned slavery, he was no longer a slave.
The Court's Ruling
The Court ruled that African Americans, whether free or slave, were not considered citizens of the United States, and therefore had no right to sue in federal court. It also decided that the Missouri Compromise was unconstitutional.
The Court's Reasoning
Chief Justice Roger B. Taney wrote in the majority opinion that the Court did not believe that African Americans were included in the Constitution's definition of citizens and that they "had no rights which the white man was bound to respect." Addressing a side issue in the case, the opinion also stated that
V *
Congress could not outlaw slavery in the territories. This struck down the Missouri Compromise, which had made slavery illegal in territories north of the 36°30' dividing line.
Why It Matters
The Dred Scott case was seen as a setback to abolitionist ideas against slavery. It reduced the status of free African Americans and upheld the view of slaves as property without rights or protection under the Constitution. It also took from Congress the power to ban slavery in its territories, which would aid the spread of slavery in new states. Because of its pro-slavery decision, the reputation of the Court suffered greatly in parts of the North.
ANALYSIS
SKILL!
Analyzing Information i do vou think the Court ruled that African
rrrcrrn.1	rrflnrmnrrrrrr
I courts? t efforts?
A DIVIDED NATION 481
A
Growing Conflict tier's .................... . -- .
Causes of Conflict
•	Failure of Missouri Compromise
•	Failure of Compromise of 1850
•	Kansas-Nebraska Act
•	Dred Scott decision
Short-Term Effects
•	Political battles
•	Sectional differences
•	"Bleeding Kansas"
•	Lincoln-Douglas debates
his favor, the Missouri Supreme Court overturned this ruling.
Scott's case reached the U.S. Supreme Court 11 years later, in 1857. The justices—a majority of whom were from the South— had three key issues before them. First, the Court had to rule on whether Scott was a citizen. Only citizens could sue in federal court. Second, the Court had to decide if his time living on free soil made him free. Third, the Court had to determine the constitutionality of prohibiting slavery in parts of the Louisiana Purchase.
The Supreme Court's Ruling Chief Justice Roger B. Taney (TAw-nee), himself from a slaveholding family in Maryland, wrote the majority opinion in the Dred Scott decision in March 1857. First, he addressed the issue of Dred Scott's citizenship. Taney
said the nation's founders believed that African Americans "had no rights which a white man was bound to respect." He therefore concluded that all African Americans, whether slave or free, were not citizens under the U.S. Constitution. Thus, Dred Scott did not have the right to file suit in federal court.
Taney also ruled on the other issues before the Court. As to whether Scott's residence on free soil made him free, Taney flatly said it did not. Because Scott had returned to the slave state of Missouri, the chief justice said, "his status, as free or slave, depended on the laws of Missouri."
Finally, Taney declared the Missouri Compromise restriction on slavery north of 36°30' to be unconstitutional. He pointed out that the Fifth Amendment said no one could "be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of law." Because slaves were considered property, Congress could not prohibit someone from taking slaves into a federal territory. Under this ruling, Congress had no right to ban slavery in any federal territory.
Most white southerners cheered this decision. It "covers every question regarding slavery and settles it in favor of the South," reported a Georgia newspaper. Another newspaper, the New Orleans Picayune, assured its readers that the ruling put "the whole basis of the... Republican organization under the ban of law."
The ruling stunned many northerners. The Republicans were particularly upset because their platform in 1856 had argued that Congress held the right to ban slavery in the federal territories. Now the nation's highest court had ruled that Congress did not have this right.
Indeed, some northerners feared that the spread of slavery would not stop with the federal territories. Illinois lawyer Abraham Lincoln warned that a future Court ruling, or what he called "the next Dred Scott decision," would prohibit states from banning slavery.
490 CHAPTER 15
Primary Source
SPEECH
A
House Divided In 1858Abraham Lincoln gave a passionate speech to Illinois Republicans about the dangers of the disagreement over slavery. Some considered it a call for war.
In my opinion, it [disagreement over slavery] will not cease [stop], until a crisis shall have been reached and passed. "A house divided A against itself cannot stand." I believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free. I do not expect the Union to be dissolved—I do not expect the house to fall—but I do expect it will cease to be divided.**
/	—Abraham Lincoln,
Lincoln expresses confidence that the Union will survive.
We shall lie down pleasantly dreaming that the people of Missouri are on the verge of [close to] making their state free; and we shall awake to the reality, instead, that the Supreme Court has made Illinois a slave state.
—Abraham Lincoln, quoted in The Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln, edited by Roy P. Basler
READING CHECK
Summarizing What were the major rulings of the Dred Scott decision?
Lincoln-Douglas Debates
In 1858 Illinois Republicans nominated Abraham Lincoln for the U.S. Senate. His opponent was Democrat Stephen Douglas, who had represented Illinois in the Senate since 1847. Lincoln challenged Douglas in what became the historic Lincoln-Douglas debates.
In each debate, Lincoln stressed that the central issue of the campaign was the spread of slavery in the West. He said that the Democrats were trying to spread slavery across the nation.
I, A
HISTORY
This line is a paraphrase of a line in the Bible
quoted in Abraham Lincoln: Speeches and Writings 1832-1858 edited by Don E. Fehrenbacher
ANALYSIS
SKILLS
Analyzing Primary Sources What do you think Lincoln meant by "crisis"?
Lincoln talked about the Dred Scott decision. He said that African Americans were "entitled to all the natural rights" listed in the Declaration of Independence, specifically mentioning "the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." However, Lincoln believed
that African Americans were not necessarily the social or political equals of whites. Hoping to cost Lincoln votes, Douglas charged that Lincoln "thinks that the Negro is his brother..."
Douglas also criticized Lincoln for saying that the nation could not remain "half slave and half free." Douglas said that the statement revealed a Republican desire to make every state a free state. This, he warned, would only lead to "a dissolution [destruction] of the Union" and "warfare between the North and the South."
At the second debate, in the northern Illinois town of Freeport, Illinois, Lincoln pressed Douglas on the apparent contradiction between the Democrats' belief in popu-
VIDEO
J
House Divided
Speech
ipBBSB
THE IMPACT
TODAY
Today political debates are televised and c be seen arouni the world.
A DIVIDED NATION 4'
ilBiB
U^.
Senate in Illinois against Douglas in 1858. The two men debated seven times at various locations around the state. Lincoln lost the election but gained national recognition. Abraham Lincoln
Stephen Douglas
they please, for the reason that slavery cannot exist a day or an hour anywhere, unless it is supported by local police regulations."
This notion that the police would enforce the voters' decision if it contradicted the Supreme Court's decision in the Dred Scott case became known as the Freeport Doctrine.
The Freeport Doctrine put the slavery question back in the hands of American citizens. It helped Douglas win the Senate seat. Lincoln, while not victorious, became a strong, important leader of the Republican Party.

lar sovereignty and the Dred Scott decision. Lincoln asked Douglas to explain how, if Congress could not ban slavery from a federal territory, Congress could allow the citizens of that territory to ban it.
Douglas responded that it did not matter what the Supreme Court decided about slavery. He argued that "the people have the lawful means to introduce it or exclude it as
Reading Check .
Drawing Inferences Why
did Abraham Lincoln make slavery's expansion the central issue ofthe Lincoln-Douglas debates?
Summary and Preview The Dred Scott decision and the Lincoln-Douglas debates dealt with the conflict over slavery in the western territories. In the next section you will read about how the conflict broke apart the Union.
Section 3 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com

Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What was the major issue ofthe newly formed Republican Party?
b.	Draw Conclusions How did the Kansas-Nebraska Act affect political parties?
c.	Elaborate Why do you think James Buchanan won the election of 1856?
2.	a. Identify Who was Roger B. Taney, and why was
he important?
b.	Draw Conclusions How did the Dred Scott decision affect the Missouri Compromise and the expansion of slavery?
c.	Predict What problems might result from the Supreme Court's ruling in the Dred Scott case?
3.	a. Recall What was the major issue ofthe Lincoln-Douglas debates?
b. Make Inferences Despite his loss in the election, how did Lincoln become the leader of the Republican Party?
Critical Thinking
4. Identifying Points of View Review your notes on political divisions and the Dred Scott decision. Then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to identify the views of Abraham Lincoln and Stephen Douglas on slavery.
Lincoln
Douglas
VS.
myWriteSmart
5.	Taking Notes on the Political Divisions Make some notes on the Republican Party, the Dred Scott decision, and the Lincoln-Douglas debates. Decide how your character feels about each of these. How do these events affect your character?
492 CHAPTER 15
The Nlsiion Di^vides
If YOU were there...
You work for the weekly newspaper in Harpers Ferry, Virginia. You strongly oppose slavery, but you think the question ought to be resolved by laws, not bloodshed. Now your paper has sent you to interview the famous abolitionist John Brown in prison. His raids in "Bleeding Kansas" killed several people. Now he is in jail for attacking a federal arsenal and taking weapons.
What questions would you ask John Brown?
TEKS 5C,7C,7D,8A,8B,10A,17B, 21A, 22A, 24A
SECTION
What You Will Learn.
1.	John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry intensified the disagreement between free states and slave states.
2.	The outcome ofthe election of 1860 divided the United States.
3.	The dispute over slavery led the South to secede.
BUILDING BACKGROUND
Unpopular compromises and court decisions deepened the divisions between pro-slavery and antislavery i advocates. The Lincoln-Douglas debates attracted more attention to j the issue. As the disagreements grew, violence increased, though many j Americans hoped to avoid it. But it was too late to keep the nation unified, j The United States broke apart due to the growing conflict over slavery.
Raid on Harpers Ferry
In 1858 John Brown tried to start an uprising. He wanted to attack the federal arsenal in Virginia and seize weapons there. He planned to arm local slaves. Brown expected to kill or take hostage white southerners who stood in his way. He urged abolitionists to give him money so that he could support a small army. But after nearly two years, Brown's army had only about 20 men.
On the night of October 16, 1859, John Brown's raid began when he and his men took over the arsenal in Harpers Ferry, Virginia, in hopes of starting a slave rebellion. He sent several of his men into the countryside to get slaves to join him. However, enslaved African Americans did not come to Harpers Ferry, fearing punishment if they took part. Instead, local white southerners attacked Brown. Eight of his men and three local men were killed. Brown and some followers retreated to a firehouse.
Federal troops arrived in Harpers Ferry the following night. The next morning, Colonel Robert E. Lee ordered a squad of marines to storm the firehouse. In a matter of seconds, the marines killed two more of Brown's men and captured the rest—including Brown.
Brown was quickly convicted of treason, murder, and conspiracy. Some of his men received death sentences. John A. Copeland, a
Key Terms and People
John Brown's raid, p. 493 John C. Breckinridge, p. 495 Constitutional Union Party, p. 495 John Bell, p. 495 John J. Crittenden, p. 496 Confederate States of
America, p. 497 Jefferson Davis, p. 497
hmhsocjalstu(Jjes com
TAKING NOTES |
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the significance of each ofthe people listed and their relationship to the events of the section.
A DIVIDED NATION
491
Primary Source
SONG
The Battle Hymn
of the Republic
The popular song "John Brown's Body" was not originally written about the abolitionist but it was quickly adapted to describe his life and execution. In one verse, the raid on Harpers Ferry is described.
*/He captured Harpers Ferry with his nineteen men so few, /And he frightened Old Virginny till she trembled through and through, /They hung him for a traitor— themselves a traitor crew, /But his soul is marching on. (Chorus)
Glory, Glory, Hallelujah!
Glory, Glory, Hallelujah!
Glory, Glory, Hallelujah!
His soul goes marching on/^
ANALYSIS
SKILL
Analyzing primary sources
How do the lyrics of "The Battle Hymn of the Republic" demonstrate the cause that the Union soldiers were fighting for?
The song was sung by Union soldiers and supporters as a patriotic symbol. In 1859, abolitionist Julia Ward Howe wrote new lyrics for the song that became even more popular. The song no longer mentioned Brown, but described the religious importance many Unionists found for supporting the war. Named "The Battle Hymn of the Republic," the song became a marching song for the Union military. It is still sung today at many official government events.
/^Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord; /He is trampling out the vintage where the grapes of wrath are stored; /He hath loosed the fateful lightning of His terrible swift sword: /His truth is marching on.
(Chorus)
Glory, glory, hallelujah!
Glory, glory, hallelujah!
Glory, glory, hallelujah!
His truth is marching on.W
—Julia Ward Howe
fugitive slave, defended his actions. "If I am dying for freedom, I could not die for a better cause." Convinced that he also would be sentenced to death, Brown delivered a memorable speech.
"Now, if it is deemed [thought] necessary that I should forfeit [give up] my life for the furtherance of the ends of justice, and mingle [mix] my blood... with the blood of millions in this slave country whose rights are disregarded by wicked, cruel, and unjust enactments, I say, let it be done/,
—John Brown, quoted in John Brown, 1800-1859 by Oswald Garrison Villard
As expected, the judge ordered Brown to be hanged. The sentence was carried out one month later on December 2,1859.
Many northerners mourned John Brown's death, but some abolitionists criticized his extreme actions. Abraham Lincoln said Brown "agreed with us in thinking slavery wrong." However, Lincoln
continued, "That cannot excuse violence, bloodshed, and treason."
Most southern whites—both slaveholders and non-slaveholders—felt threatened by the actions of John Brown. They worried that a "John Brown the Second" might attack. One South Carolina newspaper voiced these fears; "We are convinced the safety of the South lies only outside the present Union." Another newspaper stated that "the sooner we get out of the Union, the better."
Drawing Conclusions
Why did John Brown's raid lead some southerners to talk about leaving the Union?
Election of 1860
In this climate of distrust, Americans prepared for another presidential election in 1860. The northern and southern Democrats could not agree on a candidate. Northern
READING CHECK .
494 CHAPTER 15
Democrats chose Senator Stephen Douglas. Southern Democrats backed the current vice president, John C. Breckinridge of Kentucky, who supported slavery in the territories.
Meanwhile, a new political party emerged. The Constitutional Union Party recognized "no political principles other than the Constitution of the country, the Union of the states, and the enforcement of the laws." Their platform was a reaction against the idea of states' rights. Members of this new party met in Baltimore, Maryland, and selected John Bell of Tennessee as their candidate. Bell was a slaveholder, but he had opposed the Kansas-Nebraska Act in 1854.
Senator William Seward of New York was the Republicans' leading candidate at the start of their convention. But it turned out that Lincoln appealed to more party members. A moderate who was against the spread of slavery, Lincoln promised not to abolish slavery where it already existed.
Douglas, Breckinridge, and Bell each knew he might not win the election. They hoped to win enough electoral votes to prevent Lincoln from winning in the electoral college. But with a unified Republican Party behind him, Lincoln won. Although he received the highest number of votes, he won only about 40 percent of the overall popular vote.
Lincoln won 180 of 183 electoral votes in free states. Douglas had the second-highest number of popular votes, but he won only one state. He earned just 12 electoral votes. Breckinridge and Bell split electoral votes in other slave states.
The election results angered southerners. Lincoln did not campaign in their region and did not carry any southern states, but he became the next president. The election signaled that the South was losing its national political power.
reading Check
Analyzing Why was Lincoln viewed by many as a moderate candidate during his campaign for the presidency?
Election of I860
Source: Historical Statistics of the United States
GEOGRAPHY
SKILLS! INTERPRETING MAPS
Region In which part of the country were most of the states that Lincoln won?
-DE3 MD8			
	Political	Electoral		Popular
	Party	Vote	Vote
	■| Lincoln (Republican)	180	1,865,593
HH
Douglas (N. Democrat) 12 1,382,713 	ram Breckinridge (S. Democrat)	72	848,356
	,	Bell (Constitutional Union)	39	592,906
*New Jersey cast four electoral votes for Lincoln and three for Douglas.
A DIVIDED NATION 45
The South Secedes
Lincoln insisted that he would not change slavery in the South. However, he said that slavery could not expand and thus would eventually die out completely. That idea angered many southerners.
Southerners' Reactions
People in the South believed their economy and way of life would be destroyed without slave labor. They reacted immediately. Within a week of Lincoln's election, South Carolina's legislature called for a special convention. The delegates considered secession. Southern secessionists believed that they had a right to leave the Union. They pointed out that each of the original states had voluntarily joined the Union by holding a special convention that had ratified the Constitution. Surely, they reasoned, states could leave the Union by the same process.
Critics of secession thought this argument was ridiculous. President Buchanan said the Union was not "a mere voluntary association of States, to be dissolved
at pleasure by any one of the contracting parties." President-elect Abraham Lincoln agreed, saying, "No State, upon its own mere motion, can lawfully get out of the Union." Lincoln added, "They can only do so against [the] law, and by revolution." The states' rights debate over the meaning of the Constitution had reached its tensest moment. Congress worked urgently for yet another compromise to ease the tension.
While the South Carolina representatives were meeting in Charleston to discuss secession, Congress examined a plan to save the Union. Senator John J. Crittenden of Kentucky proposed a series of constitutional amendments that he believed would satisfy the South by protecting slavery. Crittenden hoped the country could avoid secession and a civil war.
Lincoln disagreed with Crittenden's plan. He believed there could be no compromise about the extension of slavery. Lincoln wrote, "The tug has to come and better now than later." A Senate committee voted on Crittenden's plan, and every Republican rejected it, as Lincoln had requested.
Jefferson Davis takes the oath of office for president of the Confederate States
Rebel Government
This photograph is of the inauguration of Jefferson Davis as the president of the Confederate States of America. A former U.S. secretary of war, Davis was elected president of the Confederacy in 1861.
How does this photo show the state of the southern government?
The Confederate States of America
South Carolina elected to dissolve "the union now subsisting [existing] between South Carolina and other States" on December 20, 1860. Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas also seceded to form the Confederate States of America, also called the Confederacy. Its new constitution guaranteed citizens the right to own slaves.
Delegates from seceded states elected Jefferson Davis of Mississippi as president of the Confederacy. Davis had hoped to be the commanding general of Mississippi's troops. He responded to the news of his election with reluctance.
When the southern states seceded, the question of who owned federal property in the South arose. For instance, the forts in the harbor of Charleston, South Carolina, were federal property. However, Confederate president Davis and the Confederacy were ready to prevent the federal army from controlling the property.
Lincoln Takes Office
President Lincoln was inaugurated on March 4, 1861. In writing his inaugural address, Lincoln looked to many of the nation's founding documents. Referring to the idea that governments receive "their just powers from the consent of the governed," a line from the Declaration of Independence, Lincoln stated, "This country, with its institutions, belongs to the people who inhabit it. Whenever they grow weary of the existing Government, they can exercise their constitutional right of amending it or their revolutionary right to dismember [take apart] or overthrow it. I can not be ignorant of the fact that many worthy and patriotic citizens are desirous [wanting] of having the National Constitution amended..."
While he believed that U.S. citizens had the power to change their government through majority consent, he opposed the idea that southern states could leave the
Union because they were unhappy with the government's position on slavery.
He announced in his inaugural address that he would keep all government property in the seceding states. However, he also tried to convince southerners that his government would not provoke a war. He hoped that, given time, southern states would return to the Union.
Reading Check
Drawing Conclusions Why
did some southern states secede from the Union?
■ Summary and Preview The secession I of the southern states hinted at the violence to come. In the next chapter you will
read about the Civil War.
Section 4 Assessment
-a I hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Recall Why did John Brown want to seize the federal arsenal at Harpers Ferry?
b. Explain Why did some abolitionists disagree with Brown's actions?
2.	a. Identify List the candidates in the presidential election of 1860, and what party each supported.
b. Predict How might Abraham Lincoln's victory in the election of 1860 lead to future problems?
3.	a. Identify What states made up the Confederate States of America?
b.	Explain Why did Lincoln disagree with John J. Crittenden's plan to keep the Union together?
c.	Elaborate Do you believe that the southern states had the right to secede? Why or why not?
Critical Thinking
4.	Summarizing Review your notes on the significant people in the section. Then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to summarize the causes of secession.
5. Taking Notes on Secession Make some notes on the raid on Harpers Ferry, the election of 1860, and the secession of the South. Decide how your character feels about each of these. How do these events affect your character?
A DIVIDED NATION
Social Studies Skills
Analysis
Critical Thinking
Civic
Participation
Study
Assessing Primary and Secondary Sources
Define the Skill
All historical information comes from primary and secondary sources. Primary sources are documents written by someone who witnessed or took part in an event. They include diaries, letters, and artifacts such as paintings. Secondary sources are accounts of events written after the events have occurred. They retell, interpret, and summarize information from primary sources. History books, biographies, and computer software and databases are examples of secondary sources. Some sources, such as interviews and news or media reports, might be either depending on its content.
Historical sources often disagree. One writer's version of an event may be different from another writer's version. You must assess the reliability of a source in order to weigh its value to you as a source of accurate information. You can locate sources in a library, online, in newspapers, or on television.
Learn the Skill
Use these guidelines to analyze and evaluate primary and secondary sources.
1.	Identify the nature of the material. Is it a firsthand, eyewitness account or is it based on information provided by others?
2.	Evaluate the author. If the material is a secondary source, what qualifications does the author have? If the material is a primary source, what was the author's connection to the event?
3.	Determine the audience. Was the source meant to be seen by the public? The intended audience can influence a source's content.
4.	Determine the purpose. Look for evidence of exaggeration, opinion, or bias that may have influenced the account.
5.	Look for documentation. Look for other information or evidence that supports the source's account. Compare sources whenever possible.
Practice the Skill
The passage below concerns the attack on Lawrence, Kansas, that you read about in this chapter. The passage contains both a primary and a secondary source. Review the information on page 486, analyze the passage, and answer the questions that follow.
Sheriff Jones, at the head of an army of Missourians, marched into Lawrence. In broad daylight they threw the printing presses of two newspapers into a river. They burned down the Free State Hotel and other buildings. Antislavery Kansans seethed with rage. Here is how one eyewitness described the attack:
"Sheriff Jones, after looking at the flames rising from the hotel and saying that it was 'the happiest day of his life,’ dismissed the troops and they began their lawless destruction.^
1.	Which side did the author of the primary source likely support? What clues in the passage suggest this?
2.	For whom was the primary source likely written?
3.	Which source is more reliable for information about this incident? Explain why.
4.	Do research to find another primary and secondary sources on the topic.
498 CHAPTER 15
CHAPTER
Chapter Review
Visual Summary
Use the visual summary below to help you review the main ideas ofthe chapter.
Reviewing Vocabulary,
Terms, and People
Identify the correct term or person from the chapter that best fits each ofthe following descriptions.
1.	belief that voters should be given the right to decide if slavery would be permitted or banned
2.	chief justice of the Supreme Court who wrote the majority opinion for the Dred Scott decision
3.	Democratic candidate for president in 1852 who promised to enforce the Compromise of 1850 and the Fugitive Slave Act
4.	a fugitive slave whose arrest led to violence between government officials and abolitionists
5.	Republican candidate for the presidency in 1856 who opposed the spread of slavery in the West
6.	slave who sued for freedom, claiming that by living in free territory, he had earned his freedom
7.	Stephen Douglas's claim that states and territories should determine the issue of slavery through popular sovereignty
Comprehension and
Critical Thinking
SECTION 1 (Pages 476-481)
8.	a. Describe How did literature aid the antislavery movement?
b.	Draw Conclusions How did the issue of slavery promote sectionalism?
c.	Evaluate Do you think the Compromise of 1850 was a good solution? Explain your answer.
SECTION 2 (Pages 483-487)
9.	a. Identify Who were the candidates in the presidential election of 1852, and what issues did each support?
b.	Analyze How did the Kansas-Nebraska Act lead to growing hostility between pro-slavery and antislavery supporters?
c.	Elaborate Why do you think “Bleeding Kansas" produced intense controversy between many Americans?
A DIVIDED NATION 4
SECTION 3 (Pages 488-492)
10.	a. Evaluate Who was Dred Scott, and why was his case important? Evaluate the impact of the case on life in the United States.
b.	Analyze How were political parties affected by the debate over slavery?
c.	Elaborate Why do you think Republicans challenged Stephen Douglas's run for the Senate?
SECTION 4 (Pages 493-497)
11.	a. Recall Why did the southern states secede, and what was the North's response?
b.	Draw Conclusions Why did the results of the election of 1860 anger southerners?
c.	Evaluate Do you think John Brown was right to use violence to protest slavery? Explain.
d.	Analyze How did Lincoln's views on slavery and union reflect his leadership qualities?
Reviewing Themes
12.	Politics How did sectionalism affect American politics? What role did slavery have in sectional debates?
13.	Society and Culture What effect did Harriet Beecher Stowe's book Uncle Tom's Cabin have on the debate over slavery?
Using the Internet
14.	Activity: Creating a Newspaper Harriet Beecher Stowe's novel and John Brown's raids were two important events that created more debate over slavery and heightened tension between sides. Through the online textbook, learn more about antislavery actions. Then create a newspaper with which to display your research. Remember to write from the point of view of someone from the mid-1800s.
Reading Skills •*
Categorizing Use the Reading Skills taught in this chapter to answer the question below.
15.	Look back at the list of Henry Clay's ideas in the Compromise of 1850. Then categorize each idea by whether it addresses the issue of slavery, states' rights, or sectionalism. Are there any ideas that address more than one of these categories?
Social Studies Skills
Assessing Primary and Secondary Sources Use the
Social Studies Skills taught in this chapter to answer the question below.
16.	Look back through this chapter and make a list of the primary sources used. Then research each topic to find another primary source and a secondary source on each topic. Make a list of all nine items and what type of source each is. Next to the title of each source, copy a sentence with language that you believe indicates the source
is valid. Describe the author and why he or she is a valid source. Then choose one of the topics and use the sources you have found to write a summary of the events and ideas surrounding the topic. Write out each fact that you use and the sources in which you have corroborated the fact.
myWriteSmart
17. Writing Your Autobiography Review your notes. Then write your autobiography, being sure to mention each of the events from your notes.
Tell how your character heard about each event, what he or she was doing at the time, how he or she felt about the event, and how it affected him or her. What are your character's hopes and fears for the future?
W hmhsocialstudies.coml
500 CHAPTER 15
CHAPTER
Texas Test Practice
DIRECTIONS:
Read each question and write the letter of the best response. 1	Use the map below to answer the following question.
From the information in this map, you can conclude that it shows
A the provisions of the Compromise of 1850.
B the results of the election of 1860.
C the formation of the Confederacy.
D the results of the Dred Scoff decision.
2	Which leader was responsible for settling the dispute over the expansion of slavery that arose after the Mexican War?
F
David Wilmot G Henry Clay H Abraham Lincoln J Jefferson Davis 3	California’s admission as a free state after the Mexican War aroused controversy because
A many Californians already held slaves.
B it would upset the balance between free states and slave states.
C
Mexico still claimed that California was part of Mexico’s territory. D most Californians wanted independence.
4	Widespread violence erupted in Kansas over slavery in the mid-1850s mainly due to
F the practice of popular sovereignty.
G the Pottawatomie Massacre.
H the Missouri Compromise.
J the threat of secession.
5	The election of 1852 led directly to which of the following?
A the Compromise of 1850 B the collapse of the Whig Party C the collapse of the Republican Party D the Missouri Compromise.
6	The Compromise of 1850 was most similar to what earlier compromise between free states and slave states?
F the Great Compromise G the Rush-Bagot Agreement H the Northwest Ordinance J the Missouri Compromise
7	Examine the following passage written by a southerner before secession and then use it to answer the question below.
/zAs we sat around the long table today the talk turned to the [secession] convention, so soon to meet in Tallahassee [Florida]. Father said he considered this the most important year in the history of the South. He is for secession, and he does not think that war will necessarily [certainly] follow. Brother Junius is a strong Union man, and he thinks we will certainly have war. If the South secedes, the North will fight to keep us. If we do not secede, all property rights will be taken from us and we will be forced to fight to hold our own/'
-Susan Bradford, adapted from Heroines of Dixie, edited by Katharine Jones
Document-Based Question What might be the outcome of this convention? Why?
A DIVIDED NATION 5(
Writing
Workshop
Assignment
Write a paper comparing and contrasting one of the following: (1) America before and after the Industrial Revolution, (2) the lives of free blacks in the North with the lives of free blacks in the South.
Using Graphic Organizers
i diagrams help you focus on similarities and differences. Write details the subjects have in common in the overlapping area. Write details that make each subject different in the sections that do not overlap.
Comparing People and Events
One way to learn more about historical figures and events is to compare and contrast them. By studying how the figures or events are alike and different, you can begin to see each one more clearly.
1. Prewrite
Getting Started
"How are they alike?" "How are they different?" Jot down answers to these questions as you research the lives of free blacks or the Industrial Revolution. Group your answers into points of comparison. For example, points of comparison for the lives of free blacks might be work, education, etc. Points of comparison for the Industrial Revolution might be factories or farming.
Organizing Your Information
There are two ways to organize a compare-and-contrast paper.
■	Block Style Say everything you have to say about one subject. Then say everything you have to say about the second subject. Discuss the points of comparison in the same order for each subject.
■	Point-by-Point Style Discuss the points of comparison one at a time. Explain how the subjects are alike and different on one point of comparison, then another, and so on. Discuss the subjects in the same order for each point of comparison.
2. Write
You can use this framework with your notes to help you write your
A
Writer's Framework first draft. Introduction ■	Identify the two subjects and give background information to help readers understand your comparisons. ■	State your big idea, or main purpose, in comparing and contrasting them.	Body ■	Use block or point-by-point organization. ■	Use three points of comparison. ■	Support your points with specific historical facts, details, and examples.	Conclusion	j ■	Restate your big idea.	j ■	Summarize the points you made. ■	Expand on your big idea, perhaps by j relating it to later historical events or other historical figures.	j
502 UNIT 4
3. Evaluate and Revise Evaluating
Use these questions to discover ways to improve your paper.
Evaluation Questions for a Comparison/Contrast Paper
■	Do you introduce both subjects in the first paragraph?
■	Do you state your big idea in the introduction?
■	Do you provide relevant background information in a clear and concise manner?
■	Do you include three points of comparison between the subjects?
■	Do you use either the block style or point-by-point style
to organize your points of comparison?
■	Do you support your points of comparison with appropriate historical facts, details, and examples?
■	Do you restate your big idea and summarize your points?
■	Are you using correct grammar, spelling, sentence structure, punctuation, and appropriate citation of your sources?
Making Meaning Clear
One way to make relationships between ideas clear is to repeat key or similar words and phrases in your writing. For example, you can use similar wording when comparing two historical figures on the same point of comparison.
EXAMPLE
Samuel Slater filled his labor needs by hiring entire families to work in the mills. Francis Lowell filled his labor needs by hiring young, unmarried women to work in the mills.
Revising
As you reread your paper, look for sentences that start with There was or There were. Sentences beginning with There was/There were tend to be weak: The verbs was and were do not convey any action.
Weak
There was a decline in southern agriculture after the American Revolution.
Stronger
Southern agriculture declined after the American Revolution.
4. Proofread and Publish
Proofreading
In a research report, you may be referring to the titles of your sources of information. Check to see whether you have punctuated any titles according to these guidelines.
■	Underlining (if you are writing) or italics (if you are using a computer) for books, movies, TV programs, Internet sites, and magazines or newspapers
■	Quotation marks for magazine articles, newspaper articles, chapters in a book
Publishing
Share your paper with one or more classmates. After reading each other's papers, you can compare and contrast them.
'^WriteSmart
Use myWriteSmart to create, share, and revise your paper.
• 5. Practice and Apply
Use the steps and strategies outlined in this workshop to write your paper comparing and contrasting two people or events.
THE NATION EXPANDS 5
UNIT


\
^1
’^1 Hl,; ClV<(V<'*M
A-'JaLi dlu 1 ?diUi,-vvH>ti tkti

\

jf

C x
K -
67 . i.!
<181
504










1

What You Will Learn...
When compromise after compromise failed, the United States was divided by war. The American Civil War tested the strength of the bond between the states. During the Civil War, Americans fought each other on battlefields and in government. Ideas about slavery and sovereignty led many soldiers to fight. Eventually the nation was reunited, but deep scars remained. In the next two chapters, you will learn about the war and the period after when rebuilding the South became a priority.
Explore the Art
This painting is titled Fight for the Colors.
It shows Union and Confederate troops at the Battle of Gettysburg, which began in Pennsylvania on July 1,1863. This 3-day battle was the largest and bloodiest in the Civil War. What aspects of the Civil War does this picture show?

*<




	


KWx *
sMW -
7
tf \





***-

v *

CHAPTER
1861-1865
iijwsHB
Essential Question
In what ways did the Civil War transform the nation?
nivNotebook
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS)
A, 10C, 11 A, 11B, 21A, 22B, 23E, 29B
SECTION 1: The War Begins............................510
The Big Idea Civil war broke out between the North and the South in 1861.
SECTION 2: The War in the East.......................516
The Big Idea Confederate and Union forces faced off in Virginia and at sea.
SECTION 3: The War in the West.......................522
The Big Idea Fighting in the Civil War spread to the western
United States.
SECTION 4: Daily Life during the War.................528
The Big Idea The lives of many Americans were affected by the Civil War.
SECTION 5: The Tide of War Turns.....................536
The Big Idea Union victories in 1363,1864, and 1865 ended the Civil War.



^WriteSmarc
Writing a Newspaper Article For most of this nation's history, newspapers have been an important way for citizens to learn about what is happening in the United States. In this chapter you will read about the main events of the Civil War. Then you will choose one of these events and write a newspaper article about it.
United
States
1861 Confederate guns open fire on Fort Sumter on April 12.
Confederates win the first battle of the Civil War on July 21 at Bull Bun in Virginia.
World
