 5. Judge Baker, sentencing hearing in the court case against Mrs. Margaret Douglass of Norfolk, Virginia, January 10, 1854. Southern whites considered the acquisition of literacy by blacks, whether slave or free, as a public danger, especially after the Nat Turner uprising in Southampton County, Virginia, in 1831 (Chapter 11, p. 362). A Virginia court sent Mrs. Margaret Douglass to jail for a month “as an example to all others” for teaching free black children to read so they might have access to books on religion and morality.

 There are persons, I believe, in our community, opposed to the policy of the law in question. They profess to believe that universal intellectual culture is necessary to religious instruction and education, and that such culture is suitable to a state of slavery. . . . Such opinions in the present state of our society I regard as manifestly mischievous. It is not true that our slaves cannot be taught religious and moral duty, without being able to read the Bible and use the pen. Intellectual and religious instruction often go hand in hand, but the latter may well be exist without the former; . . . among the whites one-fou[r]th or more are entirely without a knowledge of letters, [nonetheless,] respect for the law, and for moral and religious conduct and behavior, are justly and prope[r]ly appreciated and practiced. . . . The first legislative provision upon this subject was introduced in the year 1831, immediately succeeding the bloody scenes of the memorable Southampton insurrection; and . . . was re-enacted with additional penalties in the year 1848. . . . After these several and repeated recognitions of the wisdom and propriety of the said act, it may well be said that bold and open opposition to it [must be condemned] . . . as a measure of self-preservation and protection. Sources: (1) “Religion and Social Reform,” the Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History, gilderlehrman.org; (2) New York Legislature Documents, Vol. 34, No. 65, Part 1 (Albany, NY: J. B. Lyon Company, 1919), 60; (3) Catharine E. Beecher, Educational Reminiscences and Suggestions (New York: J. D. Ford & Company, 1874), 127; (4) The North American Review 36, no. 58 (January 1833); (5) “The Case of Mrs. Margaret Douglass,” Africans in America, pbs.org.

Source: Joshua R. Greenberg, Advocating the Man.


ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE 1.
What arguments does the editorial in the Philadelphia National Gazette (source 1) advance? How does Stevens (source 2) reframe this argument? 2. What does the letter from a former student of Beecher’s (source 3) tell us about the links between educational reform and other social movements, such as Sabbatarianism (p. 305)? How does it help us to understand the fate of the “notables” and the “log cabin campaign” of 1840? 3. What is the larger agenda of the author of source 4? How is the argument here similar to, or different from, that in sources 1 and 2? 4. How does Judge Baker (source 5) justify the denial of education to African Americans? 5. What do the occupations of the Working Men’s Party candidates suggest about its definition of “worker” (source 6)? How does the political agenda of the party relate to the arguments advanced in sources 2 and 4? To present-day debates regarding the education of illegal immigrants? 
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
As these selections indicate, the debate over education had many facets. Did the power traditionally held by “notables” rest on their access to private schooling? Should a democratic society ensure the literacy of citizen voters? Was religious instruction a telling argument for slave literacy? Using these documents, your answers to the questions above, and materials in Chapters 8 and 10, write an essay that discusses public education, responsible citizenship, and social reform in America between 1820 and 1860. 




 PART 4

OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

 Department in 1836 to issue the Specie Circular, an executive order that required the Treasury Department to accept only gold and silver in payment for lands in the national domain. Critics charged — mistakenly — that the Circular drained so much specie from the economy that it sparked the Panic of 1837. In fact (as noted above), the curtailing of credit by the Bank of England was the main cause of the panic. Nonetheless, the public turned its anger on Van Buren, who took office just before the panic struck. Ignoring the pleas of influential bankers, the new president refused to revoke the Specie Circular or take actions to stimulate the economy. Holding to his philosophy of limited government, Van Buren advised Congress that “the less government interferes with private pursuits the better for the general prosperity.” As the depression deepened in 1839, this laissezfaire outlook commanded less and less political support. Worse, Van Buren’s major piece of fiscal legislation, the Independent Treasury Act of 1840, delayed recovery by pulling federal specie out of Jackson’s pet banks (where it had backed loans) and placing it in government vaults, where it had little economic impact.

 The Log Cabin Campaign The Whigs exploited Van Buren’s weakness. In 1840, they organized their

 first national convention and nominated William Henry Harrison of Ohio for president and John Tyler of Virginia for vice president. A military hero of the Battle of Tippecanoe and the War of 1812, Harrison was well advanced in age (sixty-eight) and had little political experience. However, the Whig leaders in Congress, Henry Clay and Daniel Webster, wanted a president who would rubber-stamp their program for protective tariffs and a national bank. An unpretentious, amiable man, Harrison told voters that Whig policies were “the only means, under Heaven, by which a poor industrious man may become a rich man without bowing to colossal wealth.” The depression stacked the political cards against Van Buren, but the election turned as much on style as on substance. It became the great “log cabin campaign” — the first time two well-organized parties competed for votes through a new style of campaigning. Whig songfests, parades, and well-orchestrated mass meetings drew new voters into politics. Whig speakers assailed “Martin Van Ruin” as a manipulative politician with aristocratic tastes — a devotee of fancy wines, elegant clothes, and polite refinement, as indeed he was. Less truthfully, they portrayed Harrison as a self-made man who lived contentedly in a log cabin and quaffed hard cider, a drink of the common people. In fact, Harrison’s father was a wealthy Virginia planter who The Whigs Boost Harrison and Tyler for the White House In their quest for victory in 1840, Whig political strategists advanced a wide-ranging (and misleading) set of policies. This poster celebrates William Henry Harrison and John Tyler as candidates who would secure protective tariffs for American manufacturers — a policy that appealed to northern voters but one that Tyler opposed. It also promises to cut the size of the U.S. Army, which General Harrison did not favor. However, denouncing a large “Standing Army” would win votes in Virginia, where it recalled the fears of Radical Whig Patriots of 1776 and remained central to the states’ rights ideology espoused by Senator Tyler and other “Old Republicans.” Grouseland Foundation, Inc./Photo courtesy of “Fords the Art of Photography,” Vincennes, IN.

 CHAPTER 10

A
Democratic Revolution, 1800–1844 



President John Tyler (1790–1862)
 Both as an “accidental” president and as a man, John Tyler left his mark on the world. His initiative to annex Texas made the election of 1844 into a pivotal contest and led to the war with Mexico in 1846. Tyler’s first wife, Letitia, give birth to eight children before dying in the White House in 1842. Two years later, he married twentyfour-year-old Julia Gardiner, who bore him seven more children. White House Historical Association (White House Collection).

 had signed the Declaration of Independence, and Harrison himself lived in a series of elegant mansions. The Whigs boosted their electoral hopes by welcoming women to campaign festivities — a “first” for American politics. Many Jacksonian Democrats had long embraced an ideology of aggressive manhood, likening politically minded females to “public” women, prostitutes who plied their trade in theaters and other public places. Whigs took a more restrained view of masculinity and recognized that Christian women had already entered American public life through the temperance movement and other benevolent activities. In October 1840, Daniel Webster celebrated moral reform to an audience of twelve hundred women and urged them to back Whig candidates. “This way of making politicians of their women is something new under the sun,” exclaimed one Democrat, worried that it would bring more Whig men to the polls. And it did: more than 80 percent of the eligible male voters cast ballots in 1840, up from fewer than 60 percent in 1832 and 1836 (see Figure 10.1). Heeding the Whigs’ campaign slogan “Tippecanoe and Tyler Too,” they voted Harrison into the White House with 53 percent of the popular vote and gave the party a majority in Congress.

Tyler Subverts the Whig Agenda Led by Clay and
 Webster, the Whigs in Congress prepared to reverse the Jacksonian revolution. Their hopes were shortlived; barely a month after his inauguration in 1841, Harrison died of pneumonia, and the nation got “Tyler Too.” But in what capacity: as acting president or as president? The Constitution was vague on the issue. Ignoring his Whig associates in Congress, who wanted a weak chief executive, Tyler took the presidential oath of office and UNDERSTAND declared his intention to govern POINTS OF VIEW as he pleased. As it turned out, How did Whigs and Democrats view women that would not be like a Whig. Tyler had served in the House in politics, and why did and the Senate as a Jeffersonian they hold those views? Democrat, firmly committed to slavery and states’ rights. He had joined the Whigs only to protest Jackson’s stance against nullification. On economic issues, Tyler shared Jackson’s hostility to the Second Bank and the American System. He therefore vetoed Whig bills that would have raised tariffs and created a new national bank. Outraged by this betrayal, most of Tyler’s cabinet resigned in 1842, and the Whigs expelled Tyler from their party. “His Accidency,” as he



 PART 4

OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

 was called by his critics, was now a president without a party. The split between Tyler and the Whigs allowed the Democrats to regroup. The party vigorously recruited subsistence farmers in the North, smallholding planters in the South, and former members of the Working Men’s Parties in the cities. It also won support among Irish and German Catholic immigrants — whose numbers had increased during the 1830s — by backing their demands for religious and cultural liberty, such as the freedom to drink beer and whiskey. A pattern of ethnocultural politics, as historians refer to the practice of voting along ethnic and religious lines, now became a prominent feature of American life. Thanks to these urban and rural recruits, the Democrats remained the majority party in most parts of the nation. Their program of equal rights, states’ rights, and cultural liberty was attractive to more white Americans than the Whig platform of economic nationalism, moral reform, temperance laws, and individual mobility.

SUMMARY
In this chapter, we examined the causes and the consequences of the democratic political revolution. We saw that the expansion of the franchise weakened the political system run by notables of high status and 
 encouraged the transfer of power to professional politicians — men like Martin Van Buren, who were mostly of middle-class origin. We also witnessed a revolution in government policy, as Andrew Jackson and his Democratic Party dismantled the mercantilist economic system of government-supported economic development. On the national level, Jackson destroyed Henry Clay’s American System; on the state level, Democrats wrote new constitutions that ended the Commonwealth System of government charters and subsidies to private businesses. Jackson’s treatment of Native Americans was equally revolutionary; the Removal Act of 1830 forcefully resettled eastern Indian peoples west of the Mississippi River, opening their ancestral lands to white settlement. Finally, we watched the emergence of the Second Party System. Following the split in the Republican Party during the election of 1824, two new parties — the Democrats and the Whigs — developed on the national level and eventually absorbed the members of the AntiMasonic and Working Men’s parties. The new party system established universal suffrage for white men and a mode of representative government that was responsive to ordinary citizens. In their scope and significance, these political innovations matched the economic advances of both the Industrial Revolution and the Market Revolution.

 CHAPTER 10

C H A P T E R


CHAPTER REVIEW

R E V I E W


M A K E I T S T I C K
Go to LearningCurve to retain what you’ve read. 
TERMS TO KNOW

 Identify and explain the significance of each term below.

Key Concepts and Events
 franchise (p. 316) notables (p. 316) political machine (p. 317) spoils system (p. 318) caucus (p. 318) American System (p. 319) internal improvements (p. 319) corrupt bargain (p. 319) “consolidated government” (p. 320) Tariff of Abominations (p. 320) nullification (p. 324)

Key People
 states’ rights (p. 324) Second Bank of the United States (p. 325) Indian Removal Act of 1830 (p. 327) Trail of Tears (p. 331) classical liberalism, or laissezfaire (p. 332) Whigs (p. 332) Panic of 1837 (p. 334) Specie Circular (p. 338) ethnocultural politics (p. 340)

Martin Van Buren (p. 317)
John Quincy Adams (p. 318)
Henry Clay (p. 319)
Andrew Jackson (p. 319)
John C. Calhoun (p. 324)
Daniel Webster (p. 324)
Nicholas Biddle (p. 326)
Roger B. Taney (p. 331)
John Tyler (p. 339)


REVIEW QUESTIONS
Answer these questions to demonstrate your understanding of the chapter’s main ideas. 
1. How did Andrew Jackson and the Democratic


 Party fundamentally change public policy? Illustrate your argument with specific examples.

 2. What were the various constitutional arguments

 underlying the debates over internal improvements, the tariff, and nullification?

 3. How and why did the policies of the federal and

 state governments toward Native Americans change between the 1790s (Chapter 7) and the

 1850s, and what were the reactions of Indian peoples to those policies? 4. THEMATIC UNDERSTANDING Review the

 events listed under “Politics and Power” on the thematic timeline on page 283. As the timeline indicates, the Working Men’s and Anti-Masonic parties rose and declined between 1827 and 1834, and then the Whig Party emerged. How do you explain the timing of these events?





 PART 4

CHAPTER REVIEW

MAKING CONNECTIONS

 Recognize the larger developments and continuities within and across chapters by answering these questions.

ACROSS TIME AND PLACE
The chapter 
 argues that a democratic revolution swept America in the decades after 1820 and uprooted the old system of politics. After reviewing the discussions of politics in Chapters 6 and 7, explain how party systems and political alignments changed over time and then assess the strength of this argument.

MORE TO EXPLORE

VISUAL EVIDENCE
Look again at the political 
 cartoons on the tariff (p. 320) and the vicepresidency (p. 324). What point of view does the cartoonist support, and how effective are the cartoons in championing that view? How are today’s negative political advertisements on television similar or different?

 Start here to learn more about the events discussed in this chapter.

Robert J. Conley, Mountain Windsongs: A Novel of the
 Trail of Tears (1992). Captures the human impact of Jackson’s removal policy. Richard Hofstadter, The Idea of a Party System (1969). Lucidly explains the triumph of party politics. Thomas N. Ingersoll, To Intermix with Our White Brothers (2005). Argues that fear of racial intermixture shaped popular thought and government policy toward Indians.

Robert V. Remini, The Life of Andrew Jackson (1988).
 Highlights Jackson’s triumphs and shortcomings. Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America (1835). A classic that is still worth dipping into; also available at xroads.virginia.edu/~hyper/detoc/home.html. Sean Wilentz, Chants Democratic (1986). Covers the ideology of working men.

 CHAPTER 10

 TIMELINE

 1810s

CHAPTER REVIEW

 Ask yourself why this chapter begins and ends with these dates and then identify the links among related events.

 States expand white male voting rights Martin Van Buren creates disciplined party in New York



 House of Representatives selects John Quincy Adams as president Adams endorses Henry Clay’s American System



 Working Men’s Parties win support Tariff of Abominations raises duties Andrew Jackson elected president John C. Calhoun’s South Carolina Exposition and Protest



 Jackson vetoes National Road bill Congress enacts Jackson’s Indian Removal Act



 Cherokee Nation v. Georgia denies Indians’ independence, but Worcester v. Georgia (1832) upholds their political autonomy



 Massacre of 850 Sauk and Fox warriors at Bad Axe Jackson vetoes renewal of Second Bank South Carolina adopts Ordinance of Nullification



 Congress enacts compromise tariff



 Whig Party formed by Clay, Calhoun, and Daniel Webster



 Roger Taney named Supreme Court chief justice



 Van Buren elected president



 Charles River Bridge case weakens chartered monopolies Panic of 1837 derails economy and labor movement



 Many Cherokees die in Trail of Tears march to Indian Territory

1839–1843


 Defaults on bonds by state governments spark international financial crisis and depression



 Whigs win “log cabin campaign”



 John Tyler succeeds William Henry Harrison as president

KEY TURNING POINTS:
Based on the events in the timeline (and your reading in Chapter 10), which five-year period brought more significant changes to American political and economic life: 1829–1833, Andrew Jackson’s first term as president, or 1837–1842, the years of panic and depression? Explain and defend your choice. 




Religion and Reform
1800–1860


C H A P T E R
INDIVIDUALISM: THE ETHIC OF THE MIDDLE CLASS
Ralph Waldo Emerson and Transcendentalism Emerson’s Literary Influence 
RURAL COMMUNALISM AND URBAN POPULAR CULTURE
The Utopian Impulse Joseph Smith and the Mormon Experience 
T


 he spirit of reform is in every place,” declared the children of legal reformer David Dudley Field in their handwritten monthly Gazette in 1842:

IDENTIFY THE BIG IDEA
To what extent did individualism, new religious sects, abolitionism, and women’s rights (as the movement was called in the nineteenth century) change American culture between 1820 and 1860? 
 The labourer with a family says “reform the common schools,” the merchant and the planter say, “reform the tariff,” the lawyer “reform the laws,” the politician “reform the government,” the abolitionist “reform the slave laws,” the moralist “reform intemperance,” . . . the ladies wish their legal privileges extended, and in short, the whole country is wanting reform.

Urban Popular Culture


ABOLITIONISM
Black Social Thought: Uplift, Race Equality, and Rebellion Evangelical Abolitionism Opposition and Internal Conflict 
THE WOMEN’S RIGHTS MOVEMENT
Origins of the Women’s Movement From Black Rights to Women’s Rights 


 Like many Americans, the Field children sensed that the political whirlwind of the 1830s had transformed the way people thought about themselves and about society. Suddenly, thousands of men and women took inspiration from the economic progress and democratic spirit of the age. Drawing on the religious optimism of the Second Great Awakening, they felt that they could improve their personal lives and society as a whole. Some activists dedicated themselves to the cause of reform. William Lloyd Garrison began as an antislavery advocate and foe of Indian removal and then went on to campaign for women’s rights, pacifism, and the abolition of prisons. Susan B. Anthony embraced antislavery, temperance, and female suffrage. Such obsessively reformminded individuals, warned Unitarian minister Henry W. Bellows, were pursuing “an object, which in its very nature is unattainable — the perpetual improvement of [people’s] outward condition.” In Bellows’s view, human progress depended on inner character, the “regeneration of man” through Christian precepts. Such debates reveal the multifaceted character of the reform impulse. Like Bellows, the first wave of American reformers, the benevolent religious improvers of the 1820s, hoped to promote morality and enforce social discipline. They championed regular church attendance, temperance, and a strict moral code. Their zeal offended many upright citizens: “A peaceable man can hardly venture to eat or drink, . . . to correct his child or kiss his wife, without obtaining the permission . . . of some moral or other reform society,” said one. A second wave of reformers — Garrison, Anthony, and other activists of the 1830s and 1840s — undertook to liberate people from archaic customs and traditional lifestyles. Mostly middle-class northerners and midwesterners, these activists promoted a bewildering assortment of radical ideals: extreme individualism, common ownership of property, the immediate emancipation of slaves, and sexual equality. Although their numbers were small, second-wave reformers challenged deeply rooted cultural practices and elicited horrified opposition among the majority of Americans. As one fearful southerner saw it, radical reformers favored a chaotic world with “No-Marriage, NoReligion, No-Private Property, No-Law and No-Government.”

A
Middle-Class Marriage During the 1830s, Joseph H. Davis used bright watercolors to paint scores 
 of family portraits — 150 still survive — that capture the comfortable lives of New England’s middle classes. This double portrait commemorates the marriage of Hannah Roberts and Lewis Tebbets of Berwick, Maine. To emphasize their romantic love, Davis shows them gazing into each other’s eyes, their hands linked by a prayer book, a symbol of their education and piety. Such respectable couples — Lewis Tebbets became a minister of the Methodist Episcopal Church — flocked to hear Ralph Waldo Emerson and other lecturers on the lyceum circuit. Terra Foundation for American Art, Chicago/Art Resource, NY.





 PART 4

OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

Individualism: The Ethic
 of the Middle Class Those fears were not exaggerated. Rapid economic growth and geographical expansion had weakened traditional institutions, forcing individuals to fend for themselves. In 1835, Alexis de Tocqueville coined the word individualism to describe the result. Native-born white Americans were “no longer attached to each other by any tie of caste, class, association, or family,” the French aristocrat lamented, and so lived in social isolation. As Tocqueville mourned the loss of social ties, the New England essayist and philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–1882) celebrated the liberation of the individual. Emerson’s vision influenced thousands of ordinary Americans and a generation of important artists, who, in the American Renaissance, a mid-nineteenth-century flourishing of literature and philosophy, wrote a remarkable number of first-class novels, poems, and essays.

Ralph Waldo Emerson
 and Transcendentalism Emerson was the leading voice of transcendentalism, an intellectual movement rooted in the religious soil of New England. Its first advocates were Unitarian ministers from well-to-do New England families who questioned the constraints of their Puritan heritage (Chapter 8). For inspiration, they turned to European romanticism, a new conception of self and society. Romantic thinkers, such as German philosopher Immanuel Kant and English poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge, rejected the ordered, rational world of the eighteenth-century Enlightenment. They embraced human passion and sought deeper insight into the mysteries of existence. By tapping their intuitive powers, the young Unitarians believed, people could come to know the infinite and the eternal. As a Unitarian, Emerson stood outside the mainstream of American Protestantism. Unlike most Christians, Unitarians believed that God was a single being, not a trinity of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. In 1832, Emerson took a more radical step by resigning his Boston pulpit and rejecting all organized religion. He moved to Concord, Massachusetts, and wrote influential essays probing what he called “the infinitude of the private man,” the radically free person. The young philosopher argued that people were trapped by inherited customs and institutions. They

The Founder of Transcendentalism
 As this painting of Ralph Waldo Emerson by an unknown artist indicates, the young philosopher was an attractive man, his face brimming with confidence and optimism. With his radiant personality and incisive intellect, Emerson deeply influenced dozens of influential writers, artists, and scholars and enjoyed great success as a lecturer to the emerging middle class. © The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Image source: Art Resource, NY.

 wore the ideas of earlier times — New England Calvinism, for example — as a kind of “faded masquerade,” and they needed to shed those values. “What is a man born for but to be a Reformer, a Remaker of what man has made?” Emerson asked. In his view, individuals could be remade only by discovering their “original relation with Nature” and entering into a mystical union with the “currents of Universal Being.” The ideal setting for this transcendent discovery was under an open sky, in solitary communion with nature. The revivalist Charles Grandison Finney described his religious conversion in Emersonian terms: an individual in the woods, alone, joining with God in a mystical union. The transcendentalist message of individual selfrealization reached hundreds of thousands of people through Emerson’s writings and lectures. Public lectures had become a spectacularly successful way of

 CHAPTER 11

 spreading information and fostering discussion among the middle classes. Beginning in 1826, the lyceum movement — modeled on the public forum of the ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle — arranged lecture tours by hundreds of poets, preachers, scientists, and reformers. The lyceum became an important cultural institution in the North and Midwest, but not in the South, where the middle class was smaller and popular education had a lower priority. In 1839, nearly 150 lyceums in Massachusetts invited lecturers to address more than 33,000 subscribers. Emerson was the most popular speaker, eventually delivering fifteen hundred lectures in more than three hundred towns in twenty states. Emerson celebrated those who rejected tradition and practiced self-discipline and civic responsibility. His individualistic ethos spoke directly to the experiences of many middle-class Americans, who had left family farms to make their way in the urban world. His pantheistic view of nature — that it was saturated with the presence of God — encouraged Unitarians in Boston to create the Mount Auburn Cemetery, a beautiful planned landscape of trees and bushes and burial markers for the dead of all faiths; soon there were similar rural cemeteries in many American cities. Emerson’s optimism also inspired many religious preachers of the Second Great Awakening, such as Finney, who told believers to transcend old doctrines and constraints. “God has made man a moral free agent,” Finney declared. Emerson worried that the new market society — the focus on work, profits, and consumption — was debasing Americans’ spiritual lives. “Things are in the saddle,” he wrote, “and ride mankind.” Seeking to revive intellectual life, transcendentalists created communal experiments. The most important was Brook Farm, just outside Boston, where Emerson, Henry David Thoreau, and Margaret Fuller were residents or frequent visitors. Members recalled that they “inspired the young with a passion for study, and the middleaged with deference and admiration.” Whatever its intellectual excitement and spiritual rewards, Brook Farm was an economic failure. The residents planned to produce their own food and exchange their surplus milk, vegetables, and hay for manufactures. However, most members were ministers, teachers, writers, and students who had few farming skills; only the cash of affluent residents kept the enterprise afloat for five years. After a devastating fire in 1846, the organizers disbanded the community and sold the farm. With the failure of Brook Farm, the Emersonians abandoned their quest for new social institutions. They

Religion and Reform, 1800–1860


 accepted the brute reality of the emergent commercial and industrial order and tried to reform it, especially through the education of workers and the movement to abolish slavery.



UNDERSTAND POINTS OF VIEW
What were the main principles of transcendentalism, and how did they differ from the beliefs of most Protestant Christians? 
 Emerson’s Literary Influence Even as Emerson urged his fellow citizens to break free from tradition and expand their spiritual awareness, he issued a declaration of literary independence. In “The American Scholar” (1837), Emerson urged American authors to free themselves from the “courtly muse” of Old Europe and find inspiration in the experiences of ordinary Americans: “the ballad in the street; the news of the boat; the glance of the eye; the form and gait of the body.”

 Thoreau, Fuller, and Whitman One young New England intellectual, Henry David Thoreau (1817– 1862), heeded Emerson’s call and sought inspiration from the natural world. In 1845, depressed by his beloved brother’s death, Thoreau built a cabin near Walden Pond in Concord, Massachusetts, and lived alone there for two years. In 1854, he published Walden, or Life in the Woods, an account of his search for meaning beyond the artificiality of civilized society: I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to front only the essential facts of life, and see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and not, when I came to die, discover that I had not lived.

 Walden’s most famous metaphor provides an enduring justification for independent thinking: “If a man does not keep pace with his companions, perhaps it is because he hears a different drummer.” Beginning from this premise, Thoreau advocated a thoroughgoing individuality, urging readers to avoid unthinking conformity to social norms and peacefully to resist unjust laws. As Thoreau was seeking self-realization for men, Margaret Fuller (1810–1850) was exploring the possibilities of freedom for women. Born into a wealthy Boston family, Fuller mastered six languages and read broadly in classic literature. Embracing Emerson’s ideas, she started a transcendental “conversation,” or discussion group, for educated Boston women in 1839. While editing The Dial, the leading transcendentalist journal, Fuller published Woman in the Nineteenth Century (1844).



 PART 4

OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

 To see a longer excerpt of Woman in the Nineteenth Century, along with other primary sources from this period, see Sources for America’s History.

Margaret Fuller, 1848
 At the age of thirty-eight, the American transcendentalist author Margaret Fuller moved to Italy, where she reported on the Revolution of 1848 for the New York Tribune. There she fell in love with Thomas Hicks (1823–1890), a much younger American artist. Hicks rebuffed Fuller’s romantic advances but painted this flattering portrait, softening her features and giving her a pensive look. Fuller took as a lover a petty noble and republican revolutionary, Giovanni Angelo, Marchese d’Ossoli, and gave birth to a son in September 1848. Two years later, the entire family died in a shipwreck while en route to the United States. Constance Fuller Threinen.

 Fuller embraced the transcendental principle that all people could develop a life-affirming mystical relationship with God. Every woman therefore deserved psychological and social independence: the ability “to grow, as an intellect to discern, as a soul to live freely and unimpeded.” She wrote: “We would have every arbitrary barrier thrown down [and] every path laid open to Woman as freely as to Man.” Fuller became the literary critic of the New York EXPLAIN Tribune and traveled to Italy to CONSEQUENCES report on the Revolution of 1848, How did authors of the only to drown in a shipwreck en American Renaissance route home to the United States. incorporate transcenFuller’s life and writings inspired a dentalist ideas into their rising generation of women writwork? ers and reformers.

 The poet Walt Whitman (1819–1892) also responded to Emerson’s call. He had been “simmering, simmering,” he recalled, and then Emerson “brought me to a boil.” Whitman worked as a printer, a teacher, a journalist, an editor of the Brooklyn Eagle, and an influential publicist for the Democratic Party. However, poetry was the “direction of his dreams.” In Leaves of Grass, a collection of wild, exuberant poems first published in 1855 and constantly revised and expanded, Whitman recorded in verse his efforts to transcend various “invisible boundaries”: between solitude and community, between prose and poetry, even between the living and the dead. At the center of Leaves of Grass is the individual — “I, Walt.” He begins alone: “I celebrate myself, and sing myself.” Because he has an Emersonian “original relation” with nature, Whitman claims perfect communion with others: “For every atom belonging to me as good belongs to you.” For Emerson, Thoreau, and Fuller, the individual had a divine spark; for Whitman, the collective democracy assumed a sacred character. The transcendentalists were optimistic but not naive. Whitman wrote about human suffering with passion, and Emerson laced his accounts of transcendence with twinges of anxiety. “I am glad,” he once said, “to the brink of fear.” Thoreau was gloomy about everyday life: “The mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation.” Nonetheless, dark murmurings remain muted in their work, overshadowed by assertions that nothing was impossible for the individual who could break free from tradition.

 Darker Visions Emerson’s writings also influenced two great novelists, Nathaniel Hawthorne and Herman Melville, who had more pessimistic worldviews. Both sounded powerful warnings that unfettered egoism could destroy individuals and those around them. Hawthorne brilliantly explored the theme of excessive individualism in his novel The Scarlet Letter (1850). The two main characters, Hester Prynne and Arthur Dimmesdale, blatantly challenge their seventeenthcentury New England community by committing adultery and producing a child. Their decision to ignore social restraints results not in liberation but in degradation: a profound sense of guilt and condemnation by the community. Herman Melville explored the limits of individualism in even more extreme and tragic terms and emerged

 CHAPTER 11

 cities of the United States. There, they created a popular culture that challenged some sexual norms, reinforced traditional racist feelings, and encouraged new styles of dress and behavior.

 as a scathing critic of transcendentalism. His most powerful statement was Moby Dick (1851), the story of Captain Ahab’s obsessive hunt for a mysterious white whale that ends in death for Ahab and all but one member of his crew. Here, the quest for spiritual meaning in nature brings death, not transcendence, because Ahab, the liberated individual, lacks inner discipline and self-restraint. Moby Dick was a commercial failure. The middleclass audience that devoured sentimental American fiction refused to follow Melville into the dark, dangerous realm of individualism gone mad. What middleclass readers emphatically preferred were the more modest examples of individualism offered by Emerson and Finney: personal improvement and religious piety through spiritual awareness and self-discipline.

The Utopian Impulse
 Many rural communalists were farmers and artisans seeking refuge from the economic depression of 1837– 1843. Others were religious idealists. Whatever their origins, these rural utopias were symbols of social protest and experimentation. By advocating the common ownership of property (socialism) and unconventional forms of marriage and family life, the communalists challenged traditional property rights and gender roles.

Mother Ann and the Shakers The United Society
 of Believers in Christ’s Second Appearing, known as the Shakers because of the ecstatic dances that were part of their worship, was the first successful American communal movement. In 1770, Ann Lee Stanley (Mother Ann), a young cook in Manchester, England, had a vision that she was an incarnation of Christ. Four years later, she led a few followers to America and established a church near Albany, New York. After Mother Ann’s death in 1784, the Shakers honored her as the Second Coming of Christ, withdrew from the profane world, and formed disciplined

Rural Communalism and
Urban Popular Culture
 Between 1820 and 1860, thousands of Americans grew dissatisfied with life in America’s emerging market society and retreated into rural areas of the Northeast and Midwest (Map 11.1). There they sought to create ideal communities, or utopias, that would allow people to live differently and realize their spiritual potential. Simultaneously, tens of thousands of rural Americans and European immigrants poured into the larger MAP 11.1 Major Communal Experiments Before 1860 Some experimental communities settled along the frontier, but the vast majority chose rural areas in settled regions of the North and Midwest. Because they opposed slavery, communalists usually avoided the South. Most secular experiments failed within a few decades, as the founders lost their reformist enthusiasm or died off; tightly knit religious communities, such as the Shakers and the Mormons, were longer-lived.









Religion and Reform, 1800–1860




 300 miles

N


 300 kilometers

C A NA DA


E


W


 MAINE

S


Oneida
Community
1848–1879


 MINNESOTA

 VT.

N.H.


NEW YORK

 WISCONSIN

 MASS.

 MICHIGAN

R.I.
 CONN.

 IOWA

 PA.

Amana
1843–1932
NEBR. TERR.

N.J.


OHIO ILLINOIS

Nauvoo


KANSAS TERR.

 MD.

 INDIANA

 VIRGINIA

New Harmony
1824–1827


NORTH CAROLINA TENNESSEE

Icaria
1848–1849
 TEXAS

 ARKANSAS

Nashoba
1825–1830
 MISS.

 DEL.

ATLANTIC OCEAN

 KENTUCKY

MISSOURI UNORG. TERR.

Brook Farm
1841–1846


 ALABAMA

SOUTH CAROLINA GEORGIA

Experimental
Communities
Fourierists
Owenites
Shakers
Others
 (after Bestor and Meinig)



 PART 4

OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

Shakers at Prayer
 Most Americans viewed the Shakers with a mixture of fascination and suspicion. They feared the sect’s radical aspects, such as a commitment to celibacy and communal property, and considered the Shakers’ dancing more an invitation to debauchery than a form of prayer. Those apprehensions surfaced in this engraving, The Shakers of New Lebanon (New York), which expresses both the powerful intensity and the menacing character of this Shaker spiritual ritual. The work of the journalist-engraver Joseph Becker, the picture appeared in Frank Leslie’s Illustrated Newspaper in 1873. © Bettmann.

 religious communities. Members embraced the common ownership of property; accepted strict oversight by church leaders; and pledged to abstain from alcohol, tobacco, politics, and war. Shakers also repudiated sexual pleasure and marriage. Their commitment to celibacy followed Mother Ann’s testimony against “the lustful gratifications of the flesh as the source and foundation of human corruption.” The Shakers’ theology was as radical as their social thought. They held that God was “a dual person, male and IDENTIFY CAUSES female.” This doctrine prompted What factors led to the Shakers to repudiate male leaderproliferation of rural ship and to place community govutopian communities ernance in the hands of both in nineteenth-century women and men — the Eldresses America? and the Elders.

 Shakers founded twenty communities, mostly in New England, New York, and Ohio. Their agriculture and crafts, especially furniture making, acquired a reputation for quality that made most Shaker communities self-sustaining and even comfortable. Because the Shakers disdained sexual intercourse, they relied on conversions and the adoption of thousands of young orphans to increase their numbers. During the 1830s, three thousand adults, mostly women, joined the Shakers, attracted by their communal intimacy and sexual equality. To Rebecca Cox Jackson, an African American seamstress from Philadelphia, the Shakers seemed to be “loving to live forever.” However, with the proliferation of public and private orphanages during the 1840s and 1850s, Shaker communities began to decline and, by 1900, had virtually disappeared. They

 CHAPTER 11

 left as a material legacy a plain but elegant style of wood furniture.

Albert Brisbane and Fourierism As the Shakers’
 growth slowed during the 1840s, the American Fourierist movement mushroomed. Charles Fourier (1777–1837) was a French reformer who devised an eight-stage theory of social evolution that predicted the imminent decline of individual property rights and capitalist values. Fourier’s leading disciple in America was Albert Brisbane. Just as republicanism had freed Americans from slavish monarchical government, Brisbane argued, so Fourierist socialism would liberate workers from capitalist employers and the “menial and slavish system of Hired Labor or Labor for Wages.” Members would work for the community, in cooperative groups called phalanxes; they would own its property in common, including stores and a bank, a school, and a library. Fourier and Brisbane saw the phalanx as a humane system that would liberate women as well as men. “In society as it is now constituted,” Brisbane wrote, individual freedom was possible only for men, while “woman is subjected to unremitting and slavish domestic duties.” In the “new Social Order . . . based upon

 Attacking the Women’s Rights Movement Amelia Jenks Bloomer (1818–1894) wrote for her husband’s newspaper, the County Courier of Seneca Falls, New York. In 1848 she attended the women’s convention there and began her own biweekly newspaper, The Lily, focusing on temperance and women’s rights. In 1851, Bloomer enthusiastically promoted — and serendipitously gave her name to — the comfortable women’s costume devised by another temperance activist: loose trousers gathered at the ankles topped by a short skirt. Fearing women’s quest for equal dress and equal rights, humorists such as John Leech ridiculed the new female attire. Here, bloomer-attired women smoke away and belittle the male proprietor as “one of the ‘inferior animals,’ ” a thinly veiled effort by Leech to reassert men’s “natural” claim as the dominant sex. From Punch 1851, John Leech Archive.

Religion and Reform, 1800–1860


 Associated households,” men would share women’s domestic labor and thereby increase sexual equality. Brisbane skillfully promoted Fourier’s ideas in his influential book The Social Destiny of Man (1840), a regular column in Horace Greeley’s New York Tribune, and hundreds of lectures. Fourierist ideas found a receptive audience among educated farmers and craftsmen, who yearned for economic stability and communal solidarity following the Panic of 1837. During the 1840s, Fourierists started nearly one hundred cooperative communities, mostly in western New York and the Midwest. Most communities quickly collapsed as members fought over work responsibilities and social policies. Fourierism’s rapid decline revealed the difficulty of maintaining a utopian community in the absence of a charismatic leader or a compelling religious vision.

John Humphrey Noyes and Oneida John Humphrey
 Noyes (1811–1886) was both charismatic and religious. He ascribed the Fourierists’ failure to their secular outlook and embraced the pious Shakers as the true “pioneers of modern Socialism.” The Shakers’ marriageless society also inspired Noyes to create a community that defined sexuality and gender roles in radically new ways.





 PART 4

OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

 Noyes was a well-to-do graduate of Dartmouth College who joined the ministry after hearing a sermon by Charles Grandison Finney. Dismissed as the pastor of a Congregational church for holding unorthodox beliefs, Noyes turned to perfectionism, an evangelical Protestant movement of the 1830s that attracted thousands of New Englanders who had migrated to New York and Ohio. Perfectionists believed that Christ had already returned to earth (the Second Coming) and therefore people could aspire to sinless perfection in their earthly lives. Unlike most perfectionists, who lived conventional personal lives, Noyes rejected marriage, calling it a major barrier to perfection. “Exclusiveness, jealousy, quarreling have no place at the marriage supper of the Lamb,” Noyes wrote. Instead of the Shakers’ celibacy, Noyes embraced “complex marriage,” in which all members of the community were married to one another. He rejected monogamy partly to free women from their status as the property of their husbands, as they were by custom and by common law. Symbolizing the quest for equality, Noyes’s women followers cut their hair short and wore pantaloons under calf-length skirts. In 1839, Noyes set up a perfectionist community near his hometown of Putney, Vermont. However, local outrage over the practice of complex marriage forced Noyes to relocate the community in 1848 to an isolated area near Oneida, New York, where the members could follow his precepts. To give women the time and energy to participate fully in community affairs, Noyes urged them to avoid multiple pregnancies. He asked men to help by avoiding orgasm during intercourse. Less positively, he encouraged sexual relations at a very early age and used his position of power to manipulate the sexual lives of his followers.

 By the mid-1850s, the Oneida settlement had two hundred residents and became self-sustaining when the inventor of a highly successful steel animal trap joined the community. With the profits from trap making, the Oneidians diversified into the production of silverware. When Noyes fled to Canada in 1879 to avoid prosecution for adultery, the community abandoned complex marriage but retained its cooperative spirit. The Oneida Community, Ltd., a jointly owned silverware-manufacturing company, remained a successful communal venture until the middle of the twentieth century. The historical significance of the Oneidians, Shakers, and Fourierists does not lie in their numbers, which were small, or in their fine crafts. Rather, it stems from their radical questioning of traditional sexual norms and of the capitalist values and class divisions of the emerging market society. Their utopian communities stood as countercultural blueprints of a more egalitarian social and economic order.

Joseph Smith and the
Mormon Experience
 The Mormons, members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, were religious utopians with a conservative social agenda: to perpetuate close-knit communities and patriarchal power. Because of their cohesiveness, authoritarian leadership, and size, the Mormons provoked more animosity than the radical utopians did.

 Joseph Smith Like many social movements of the era, Mormonism emerged from religious ferment among families of Puritan descent who lived along the

A
Mormon Man and His Wives  The practice of polygamy split the Mormon community and, because it deviated from Christian religious principles, enraged Protestant denominations. This Mormon household, pictured in the late 1840s, was unusually prosperous, partly because of the labor of the husband’s multiple wives. Although the cabin provides cramped quarters for a large polygamous family, it boasts a brick chimney and — a luxury for any pioneer home — a glass window. Library of Congress.

 CHAPTER 11



Religion and Reform, 1800–1860


 one point, he identified Jackson COMPARE AND County in Missouri as the site CONTRAST of the sacred “City of Zion,” and In what ways were his followers began to settle there. Mormons similar to, Agitation led by Protestant minis- and different from, other ters quickly forced them out: communal movements of “Mormons were the common the era? enemies of mankind and ought to be destroyed,” said one cleric. Smith and his growing congregation eventually settled in Nauvoo, Illinois, a town they founded on the Mississippi River (Map 11.2). By the early 1840s, Nauvoo had 30,000 residents. The Mormons’ rigid discipline and secret rituals — along with their prosperity, hostility toward other sects, and bloc voting in Illinois elections — fueled resentment among their neighbors. That resentment increased when Smith refused to accept Illinois laws of which he disapproved, asked Congress to make Nauvoo a separate federal territory, and declared himself a candidate for president of the United States. Moreover, Smith claimed to have received a new revelation justifying polygamy, the practice of a man having multiple wives. When leading Mormon men took several wives — “plural celestial marriage” — they threw the Mormon community into turmoil and enraged nearby Christians. In 1844, Illinois officials arrested Smith and charged him with treason for allegedly conspiring to create a Mormon colony in Mexican territory. An anti-Mormon mob stormed the jail in Carthage, Illinois, where Smith and his brother were being held and murdered them.

 Erie Canal and who were heirs to a religious tradition that believed in a world of wonders, supernatural powers, and visions of the divine. The founder of the Latter-day Church, Joseph Smith Jr. (1805–1844), was born in Vermont to a poor farming and shop-keeping family that migrated to Palmyra in central New York. In 1820, Smith began to have religious experiences similar to those described in conversion narratives: “[A] pillar of light above the brightness of the sun at noonday came down from above and rested upon me and I was filled with the spirit of God.” Smith came to believe that God had singled him out to receive a special revelation of divine truth. In 1830, he published The Book of Mormon, which he claimed to have translated from ancient hieroglyphics on gold plates shown to him by an angel named Moroni. The Book of Mormon told the story of an ancient Jewish civilization from the Middle East that had migrated to the Western Hemisphere and of the visit of Jesus Christ, soon after his Resurrection, to those descendants of Israel. Smith’s account explained the presence of native peoples in the Americas and integrated them into the Judeo-Christian tradition. Smith proceeded to organize the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Seeing himself as a prophet in a sinful, excessively individualistic society, Smith revived traditional social doctrines, including patriarchal authority. Like many Protestant ministers, he encouraged practices that led to individual success in the age of capitalist markets and factories: frugality, hard work, and enterprise. Smith also stressed communal discipline to safeguard the Mormon “New Jerusalem.” His goal was a church-directed society that would restore primitive Christianity and encourage moral perfection. Constantly harassed by anti-Mormons, Smith struggled to find a secure home for his new religion. At

Brigham Young and Utah Led by Brigham Young,
 Smith’s leading disciple and now the sect’s “prophet, seer and revelator,” about 6,500 Mormons fled the United States. Beginning in 1846, they crossed the

 MAP 11.2

C A N A D A


The Mormon Trek, 1830–1848


Salt Lake
City


Winter
Quarters
(Omaha)
Ft. Bridger 1846–1848


H
SATC W A RA N G E

 Because of their unorthodox religious views and communal solidarity, Mormons faced hostility first in New York and then in Missouri and Illinois. After founder Joseph Smith Jr. was murdered, Brigham Young led the polygamist faction of Mormons into lands claimed by Mexico and thinly populated by Native Americans. From Omaha, the migrants followed the path of the Oregon Trail to Fort Bridger and then struck off to the southwest. They settled along the Wasatch Range in the basin of the Great Salt Lake in present-day Utah.

PACIFIC OCEAN

Fayette
Nauvoo
1840–1846


Kirtland
1831–1838


N
E


W
S


ATLANTIC OCEAN

Independence
1831–1839


Mormon Trail
 Proposed state of Deseret





 500 miles

 500 kilometers

 MEXICO

 Area of significant Mormon population in the West, 1960



 PART 4

OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

 Great Plains into Mexican territory and settled in the Great Salt Lake Valley in present-day Utah. Using cooperative labor and an irrigation system based on communal water rights, the Mormon pioneers quickly spread agricultural communities along the base of the Wasatch Range. Many Mormons who rejected polygamy remained in the United States. Led by Smith’s son, Joseph Smith III, they formed the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and settled throughout the Midwest. When the United States acquired Mexico’s northern territories in 1848, the Salt Lake Mormons petitioned Congress to create a vast new state, Deseret, stretching from Utah to the Pacific coast. Instead, Congress set up the much smaller Utah Territory in 1850 and named Brigham Young its governor. Young and his associates ruled in an authoritarian fashion, determined to ensure the ascendancy of the Mormon Church and its practices. By 1856, Young and the Utah territorial legislature were openly vowing to resist federal laws. Pressed by Protestant church leaders to end polygamy and considering the Mormons’ threat of nullification “a declaration of war,” President James Buchanan dispatched a small army to Utah. As the “Nauvoo Legion” resisted the army’s advance, aggressive Mormon militia massacred a party of 120 California-bound emigrants and murdered suspicious travelers and Mormons seeking to flee Young’s regime. Despite this bloodshed, the “Mormon War” ended quietly in June 1858. President Buchanan, a longtime supporter of the white South, feared that the forced abolition of polygamy would serve as a precedent for ending slavery and offered a pardon to Utah citizens who would acknowledge federal authority. (To enable Utah to win admission to the Union in 1896, its citizens ratified a constitution that “forever” banned the practice of polygamy. However, the state government has never strictly enforced that ban.) The Salt Lake Mormons had succeeded even as other social experiments had failed. Reaffirming traditional values, their leaders resolutely used strict religious controls to perpetuate patriarchy and communal discipline. However, by endorsing COMPARE AND private property and individual CONTRAST enterprise, Mormons became How were the cultures prosperous contributors to the of utopian communalists new market society. This blend of and urban residents simieconomic innovation, social conlar to and different from servatism, and hierarchical leadthe mainstream culture ership, in combination with a described in Chapters 8 strong missionary impulse, creand 9? ated a wealthy and expansive

 church that now claims a worldwide membership of about 12 million people.

Urban Popular Culture
 As utopians organized communities in the countryside, rural migrants and foreign immigrants created a new urban culture. In 1800, American cities were overgrown towns with rising death rates: New York had only 60,000 residents, Philadelphia had 41,000, and life expectancy at birth was a mere twenty-five years. Then urban growth accelerated as a huge in-migration outweighed the high death rates. By 1840, New York’s population had ballooned to 312,000; Philadelphia and its suburbs had 150,000 residents; and three other cities — New Orleans, Boston, and Baltimore — each had about 100,000. By 1860, New York had become a metropolis with more than 1 million residents: 813,000 in Manhattan and another 266,000 in the adjacent community of Brooklyn.

 Sex in the City These newly populous cities, particularly New York, generated a new urban culture. Thousands of young men and women flocked to the city searching for adventure and fortune, but many found only a hard life. Young men labored for meager wages building thousands of tenements, warehouses, and workshops. Others worked as low-paid clerks or operatives in hundreds of mercantile and manufacturing firms. The young women had an even harder time. Thousands toiled as live-in domestic servants, ordered about by the mistress of the household and often sexually exploited by the master. Thousands more scraped out a bare living as needlewomen in New York City’s booming ready-made clothes industry. Unwilling to endure domestic service or subsistence wages, many young girls turned to prostitution. Dr. William Sanger’s careful survey, commissioned in 1855 by worried city officials, found six thousand women engaged in commercial sex. Three-fifths were native-born whites, and the rest were foreign immigrants; most were between fifteen and twenty years old. Half were or had been domestic servants, half had children, and half were infected with syphilis. Commercialized sex — and sex in general — formed one facet of the new urban culture. “Sporting men” engaged freely in sexual conquests; otherwise respectable married men kept mistresses in handy apartments; and working men frequented bawdy houses. New York City had two hundred brothels in the 1820s and five hundred by the 1850s. Prostitutes — so-called “public” women — openly advertised their wares on Broadway,

 CHAPTER 11

Religion and Reform, 1800–1860


Night Life in Philadelphia
 This watercolor by Russian painter Pavel Svinin (1787–1839) captures the social diversity and allure of urban America. A respectable gentleman relishes the delicacies sold by a black oysterman. Meanwhile, a young woman — probably a prostitute but perhaps an adventurous working girl — engages the attention of two well-dressed young “swells” outside the Chestnut Street Theatre. Such scenes were new to Americans and marked the beginning of a profound split between the nation’s rural and urban cultures. © The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Image source: Art Resource, NY.

 the city’s most fashionable thoroughfare, and welcomed clients on the infamous “Third Tier” of the theaters. Many men considered illicit sex as a right. “Man is endowed by nature with passions that must be gratified,” declared the Sporting Whip, a working-class magazine. Even the Reverend William Berrian, pastor of the ultra-respectable Trinity Episcopal Church, remarked from the pulpit that he had resorted ten times to “a house of ill-fame.” Prostitution formed only the tip of the urban sexual volcano. Freed from family oversight, men formed homoerotic friendships and relationships; as early as 1800, the homosexual “Fop” was an acknowledged character in Philadelphia. Young people moved from partner to partner until they chanced on an ideal mate. Middle-class youth strolled along Broadway in the latest fashions: elaborate bonnets and silk dresses for young women; flowing capes, leather boots, and

 silver-plated walking sticks for young men. Rivaling the elegance on Broadway was the colorful dress on the Bowery, the broad avenue that ran along the east side of lower Manhattan. By day, the “Bowery Boy” worked as an apprentice or journeyman. By night, he prowled the streets as a “consummate dandy,” his hair cropped at the back of his head “as close as scissors could cut,” with long front locks “matted by a lavish application of bear’s grease, the ends tucked under so as to form a roll and brushed until they shone like glass bottles.” The “B’hoy,” as he was called, cut a dashing figure as he walked along with a “Bowery Gal” in a striking dress and shawl: “a light pink contrasting with a deep blue” or “a bright yellow with a brighter red.”

 Minstrelsy Popular entertainment was a central facet of the new urban culture. In New York, workingmen could partake of traditional rural blood





 PART 4

OVERLAPPING REVOLUTIONS, 1800–1860

 sports — rat and terrier fights as well as boxing matches — at Sportsmen Hall, or they could seek drink and fun in billiard and bowling saloons. Other workers crowded into the pit of the Bowery Theatre to see the “Mad Tragedian,” Junius Brutus Booth, deliver a stirring (abridged) performance of Shakespeare’s Richard III. Reform-minded couples enjoyed evenings at the huge Broadway Tabernacle, where they could hear an abolitionist lecture, see the renowned Hutchinson Family Singers lead a roof-raising rendition of their antislavery anthem, “Get Off the Track,” and sentimentally lament the separation of a slave couple in Stephen Foster’s “Oh Susanna,” a popular song of the late 1840s. Families could visit the museum of oddities (and hoaxes) created by P. T. Barnum, the great cultural entrepreneur and founder of the Barnum & Bailey Circus. However, the most popular theatrical entertainments were the minstrel shows, in which white actors in blackface presented comic routines that combined racist caricature and social criticism. Minstrelsy began around 1830, when a few actors put on blackface and performed song-and-dance routines (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 358). The most famous was John Dartmouth Rice, whose “Jim Crow” blended a weird shuffle-dance-and-jump with unintelligible lyrics delivered in “Negro dialect.” By the 1840s, there were hundreds of minstrel troupes, including a group of black entertainers, Gavitt’s Original Ethiopian Serenaders. The actor-singers’ rambling lyrics poked racist fun at African Americans, portraying them as lazy, sensual, and irresponsible while simultaneously using them to criticize white society. Minstrels ridiculed the

 Irish potato famine / “the Great Hunger” 1845–1852

Immigrants
 (thousands)

The Surge in Imigration, 1854–1855


U.S.
Civil War 1861–1865


 In 1845, the failure of the potato crop in Ireland prompted the wholesale migration to the United States of peasants from the overcrowded farms of its western counties. Population growth and limited economic prospects likewise spurred the migration of tens of thousands of German peasants, while the failure of the liberal republican political revolution of 1848 prompted hundreds of prominent German politicians and intellectuals to follow them. An American economic recession cut the flow of immigrants, but the booming northern economy during the Civil War again persuaded Europeans to set sail for the United States.

 German revolutions 1848−1849



U.S.
 economic recession 1856−1857

















Immigrant Masses and Nativist Reaction By 1850,
 immigrants were a major presence throughout the Northeast. Irish men and women in New York City numbered 200,000, and Germans 110,000 (Figure 11.1). German-language shop signs filled entire neighborhoods, and German foods (sausages, hamburgers, sauerkraut) and food customs (such as drinking beer in family biergärten) became part of the city’s culture. The mass of impoverished Irish migrants found allies in the American Catholic Church, which soon became an Irish-dominated institution, and the Democratic Party, which gave them a foothold in the political process. Native-born New Yorkers took alarm as hordes of ethnically diverse migrants altered the city’s culture. They organized a nativist movement — a final aspect of the new urban world. Beginning in the mid-1830s, nativists called for a halt to immigration and mounted a cultural and political assault on foreign-born residents (Chapter 9). Gangs of B’hoys assaulted Irish youths in the streets, employers restricted Irish workers to the most menial jobs, and temperance reformers denounced the German fondness for beer. In 1844, the American Republican Party, with the endorsement of the Whigs, swept the city elections by focusing on

 FIGURE 11.1



 drunkenness of Irish immigrants, parodied the halting English of German immigrants, denounced women’s demands for political rights, and mocked the arrogance of upper-class men. Still, by caricaturing blacks, the minstrels declared the importance of being white and spread racist sentiments among Irish and German immigrants.







 CHAPTER 11

 the culturally emotional issues of temperance, antiCatholicism, and nativism. In the city, as in the countryside, new values were challenging old beliefs. The sexual freedom celebrated by Noyes at Oneida had its counterpart in commercialized sex and male promiscuity in New York City, where it came under attack from the Female Moral Reform Society. Similarly, the disciplined rejection of tobacco and alcohol by the Shakers and the Mormons found a parallel in the Washington Temperance Society and other urban reform organizations. American society was in ferment, and the outcome was far from clear.

Rampant Racism
 Minstrel shows and their music were just two facets of the racist culture of mid-nineteenth-century America. Exploiting the market for almanacs among farmers and city-folk alike, the publishing firm of Fisher and Brother produced the Black Joke Al-MaNig for 1852. Like other almanacs, it provided astrological charts, weather predictions, and a detailed calendar of events. To boost sales, the almanac included “new an’ original nigga’ stories, black jokes, puns, parodies” that would “magnetize bofe white an’ black.” Such racist caricatures of black faces and language influenced white views of African Americans well into the twentieth century. Courtesy: The Library Company of Philadelphia.

Religion and Reform, 1800–1860


Abolitionism
 Like other reform movements, the abolitionist crusade of the 1830s drew on the religious enthusiasm of the Second Great Awakening. Around 1800, antislavery activists had assailed human bondage as contrary to republicanism and liberty. Three decades later, white abolitionists condemned slavery as a sin and demanded immediate, uncompensated emancipation. Their uncompromising stance led to fierce political debates, urban riots, and sectional conflict.



THINKING LIKE A HISTORIAN
Dance and Social Identity in Antebellum America 
 Styles of dance and attitudes toward them tell us a great deal about cultural and social norms. When nineteenth-century Americans took to partying, their dances — regardless of the class or ethnic identity of the dancers — focused more on individual couples and allowed more room for improvisation and intimacy than the dance forms of the previous century.

1. William Sidney Mount, Rustic Dance After a Sleigh
 Ride, 1830. In the eighteenth century, wealthy, fashionable Americans danced the French minuet, a ceremonious and graceful dance in which couples executed prescribed steps while barely touching. Ordinary white folks preferred the country dances brought by their ancestors from Europe, which also involved intricate steps, line formations, and limited physical contact. Mount (1807–1868) was self-taught, lived in rural Long Island, and depicted scenes of everyday life. This painting, replete with amorous pursuits, depicts a traditional contra dance in which the lead couple advances a few steps and then sashays to the back of the line, as another couple takes its place.

 was the most widely circulated American periodical prior to the Civil War and an arbiter of good taste among the aspiring middle classes. Each issue contained a sheet of music for the latest dance craze. The Lady’s Book cautiously endorsed the waltz, a sensuous dance that required a close embrace, but enthusiastically welcomed its cousin, the polka, whose lively tempo and rapid spinning had a wholesome and joyful quality. Introduced from Bohemia, the polka dominated the ballrooms of America’s upper and middle classes in the 1840s and 1850s.

Private Collection/The Bridgeman Art Library.


 Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts, USA/Bequest of Martha C. Karolik for the M. and M. Karolik/Collection of American Paintings, 1815–65/The Bridgeman Art Library.

 2. “The Polka Fashions,” from Godey’s Lady’s Book, 1845. “A magazine of elegant literature,” according to its publisher, Louis A. Godey, the Lady’s Book



 3. George Templeton Strong, diary entry, December 23, 1845.

 Well, last night I spent at Mrs. Mary Jones’s great ball. Very splendid affair — “the Ball of the Season.” . . . Two houses open, standing supper table, “dazzling array of beauty and fashion.” “Polka” for the first time brought under my inspection. It’s a kind of insane Tartar jig performed to disagreeable music of an uncivilized character.

 4. Description of juba dancing from Charles Dickens, American Notes for General Circulation, 1842. In New York’s Five Points slum in 1842, Charles Dickens described a challenge dance featuring William Henry Lane, or Master Juba, a young African American who created juba dancing, a blend of Irish jig and African dance moves.

 The corpulent black fiddler, and his friend who plays the tambourine, stamp upon the boarding of the small raised orchestra in which they sit, and play a lively measure. Five or six couples come upon the floor, marshalled by a lively young negro, who is the wit of the assembly, and the greatest dancer known. . . . Instantly the fiddler grins, and goes at it tooth and nail; there is new energy in the tambourine. . . . Single shuffle, double shuffle, cut and cross-cut; snapping his fingers, rolling his eyes, turning in his knees, presenting the backs of his legs in front, spinning about on his toes and heels like nothing but the man’s fingers on the tambourine; dancing with two left legs, two right legs, two wooden legs, two wire legs, two spring legs — all sorts of legs and no legs — . . . having danced his partner off her feet, and himself too, he finishes by leaping gloriously on the bar-counter, and calling for something to drink. 5. Poster advertising Barlow, Wilson, Primrose, and West’s “Mammoth Minstrels’ Colored Masquerade.” Unlike slavery, minstrelsy survived the Civil War and remained popular until the early twentieth century, when it evolved into vaudeville. Barlow, Wilson, Primrose, and West’s Mammoth

 Minstrels toured the United States, Europe, and Australia between 1877 and 1882, thrilling audiences with the clog dances that had devolved out of juba.

Sources: (3) Luther S. Harris, Around Washington Square: An Illustrated History of
Greenwich Village (Baltimore, 2003), 41; (4) Charles Dickens, American Notes and
 Pictures from Italy (C. Scribner: New York, 1868), 107.

ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE 1.
What do sources 1 and 2 suggest about sexual manners among rural folk and genteel urbanites? 2. What does the polka (sources 3 and 4) reveal about changing cultural practices among the social elite? 3. Compare the juba and minstrelsy dances described above (sources 4 and 5) with the polka and contra dance forms (sources 1 and 2). How were dance forms and popular entertainment evolving? How did those changes relate to broader social developments? 4. The waltz, polka, and juba dances were popular during the Second Great Awakening, when (and long afterward) preachers often complained that “dance is destructive to Christian life.” Why might ministers (and priests) take such a view? Would any form of dance be acceptable to them? 
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
